The Old World

All events take place an unknown time in the past, but allegedly predate Morax's birth over 6,000 years ago.

The Seven Sovereigns
Dragons and vishaps are the dominant species, led by the Seven Sovereigns and the Dragon King Nibelung.
All elemental beings come from the Light Realm, also known as the Vishap Realm.
Each of the Seven Sovereigns holds one of the seven elemental Authorities, and they are the strongest dragon of their respective element. The world is divided among them, and each one's respective land is attuned to their elemental affinity.
In Sumeru, Apep holds the Dendro elemental Authority. She rules the land while nurturing some of the most ancient and primordial beings, which are known simply as Dendro lifeforms.
The Hydro Dragon, in addition to holding the Hydro elemental Authority, also presides over the Primordial Sea and could be considered the original "God of Life" as all life on the planet can trace its origins back to the Primordial Sea. Because of this, it is sometimes referred to as "birthing waters" or "amniotic fluid." Life within the Primordial Sea was a collective rather than made up of individuals.
Eternal Throne of the Heavens
The Heavenly Principles (also known as the Primordial One, or the "eternal throne of the heavens") descends on this world and takes a portion of the Seven Sovereigns' elemental Authorities for itself. It creates the Four Shades, four shining shades of itself, to help fight the Seven Sovereigns.
Phanes, a candidate for the identity of the Heavenly Principles, arose from an "egg" as an androgynous figure. For the world to be created, the eggshell had to be broken; however, it used the eggshell to split the "universe" from the "microcosm of the world." It then came to the world as its true lord and claimed the heavens as its eternal throne.
Istaroth, the god of time and wind, is likely one of the four shades.
40 years after the Heavenly Principles appears — The Heavenly Principles and its shades emerge victorious over the Seven Sovereigns, and the world falls under the control of the heavens while the Sovereigns' subjects escape to the oceans. The Heavenly Principles begins creating heaven and earth for the sake of humanity and its creations soon after.
This leads to the existence of the Human Realm created by the Heavenly Principles.
Gnostic Chorus Story — At some point, a kingdom is established in the heavens with a king and two heirs. The first heir is tasked with finding the Genesis Pearl from the Kingdom of Darkness, but she is deceived, and her memory is changed to make her believe she was the queen of the Kingdom of Darkness. The second heir is sent out for the same task, and it is unknown if he succeeded or not.
This story is framed as an allegory for the Traveler's story, with the Traveler as the second heir and the Traveler's Sibling as the first heir. While it is not necessarily a retelling of historical events, it may suggest a relationship between the twins and Celestia.
The First Era

The term "first era" is derived from The History of the Decline and Fall of Remuria.

400 years after the Heavenly Principles appears — The Heavenly Principles finishes preparing the world for the arrival of humanity. It and one of its shades create all animal life, and humanity creates a covenant with the Heavenly Principles. The Heavenly Principles creates a "sacred plan" for humanity, an era referred to as the "Ark's Opening." Humanity tends to the land and it flourishes, leading to a period known to the Enkanomiyans as the "Year of Jubilee."
The Prayer artifact sets — Prayers to Springtime, Prayers for Illumination, Prayers for Destiny, and Prayers for Wisdom — describe a time when the earth was once covered by raw elements — unending ice, flames, lightning and water. Envoys of the gods made the earth more hospitable for humanity and dwelled among them, while humans could communicate with Celestia directly. The white Irminsul trees, connected to the ley lines in the earth, held great importance in the religious rituals of these ancient civilizations.
Life during this era is described as one of abundance and seemingly endless prosperity, and divine envoys with direct connections to Celestia dwelled among humanity. The Four Shades are among the divine envoys.
Once upon a time, the people of the land could hear revelations from Celestia directly. The envoys of the gods walked among benighted humanity then. In those days, life was weak, and the earth was blanketed in unending ice. The eternal ice had just begun to thaw, and the first fires were still new. [...] the ancient flames were extinguished amidst the first falling rains. [...] the waters ran dry as thunder first pierced the skies.
The nature of the world Celestia created was cyclical; humanity would thrive and prosper under Celestia's blessings before coming to an end, and then the earth would be renewed and the cycle begins once again. However, humanity was not meant to know this, so when people questioned how long their prosperity would last, the heavenly envoys remained silent.
To receive answers from Celestia, the people appointed chief priests who, wearing a crown made of Irminsul branches, would head to the depths of the world to attain enlightenment.
Eventually, humanity grew prideful and ambitious. They challenged the gods' authority, seeking to take the heavens for themselves and control their destinies. This angered Celestia and the heavenly envoys.
The Moon Sisters and the Seelie

Events in this section run concurrently with those in the events above, although their exact placement in the timeline is unclear.

There were three moons, who were sisters named Aria, Sonnet and Canon. They dwelled in the Lunar Palace, changing places three times a month to ride around the heavens in a silver carriage.
Around this time existed the Seelie, a race with beautiful, humanoid forms and great wisdom. They dwelled across the world and were tasked with guiding humanity. They built a large and prosperous civilization across the world and erected large palaces.
Liyue
Main article: Liyue/History §The First Era
An ancient civilization is established in the area that is now The Chasm.
Inazuma
Main article: Inazuma/History §The First Era
400 years after the Heavenly Principles appeared ― The region of Enkanomiya was part of the single, unified human civilization which spanned the whole world.
A civilization in Tsurumi Island was built and had connection with Celestia. A similar civilization was found beneath Seirai Island and Araumi.
? years ago ― The Sacred Sakura grows from "her" body after "her" death.
In the area that is now north of Mt. Yougou, Narukami Island, a kingdom built on sand had a foolish ruler who wanted to build a high garden in honor of the white sakura tree. The kingdom was swept away by floods.
A great flood ravaged the land, leaving only a few islands left. These islands are likely Narukami Island, Kannazuka, Yashiori Island, Seirai Island, and Tsurumi Island. (Watatsumi Island was created by Orobashi towards the end of the Archon War, and therefore does not exist yet.).
Towards the end of the first era—likely established after the rise to power of the Heavenly Principles—humanity begins to covet things that belong to Celestia and tries to separate itself from its destinies. As a result, the people are punished with the destruction of their cities by tsunamis and subsequent burial under water after 100 days of rain, which "drowns all sin and arrogance" and forces humanity to rebuild civilization anew. This cataclysmic event bears resemblance to the floods in Inazuma, suggesting a possible correlation with these historical events.
Fontaine
Main article: Fontaine/History §The First Era
Towards the end of the "first era" — likely the era established after the Heavenly Principles's rise to power — humanity begins to covet things that belongs to Celestia and attempt to break away from their fates.
The people are eventually punished by having their cities destroyed by tsunamis and then buried underwater after 100 days of rainfall, which "drowned all sin and arrogation" and forces humanity to rebuild civilization all over again.
Sybilla, a divine envoy tasked with guarding an Irminsul tree, remains as the sole survivor of the flood.
The Great War

The term "great war" is derived from Neuvillette's Vision Character Story, which refers to a "great war of vengeance" which badly wounded the Heavenly Principles.

After his initial defeat when the Heavenly Principles descended, the Dragon King Nibelung continues searching for a way to turn the tides. He eventually discovers the otherworldly power of forbidden knowledge and brings it to this world.
Individuals may also have entered Teyvat alongside forbidden knowledge. "Invaders" descend from "beyond the firmament," wreaking havoc across the land and spreading diseases. The Seelie waged war against them, but the forbidden knowledge they held allowed them to break the "shackles to the land."
The arrival of the Second Who Came, or the second throne of the heavens, causes war to break out between the Heavenly Principles and the Second Who Came, which results in the destruction of the heavens and earth.
Enkanomiya falls into the ocean during the disaster and is severed from the surface world.
After the war — The Heavenly Principles emerges victorious and forbids knowledge of the history that predated this war.
<6000 years ago (while Morax was young), — The Seelie civilization comes to an abrupt end after a Seelie ancestor falls in love with a certain traveler from afar, possibly as a result of the curse laid upon them that would rob them of their intelligence and strength if they fall in love with humans.
Thirty days after they pledge their union in the Lunar Palace, disaster befalls the world and the two attempted to flee from the catastrophe. The calamity caught up to them, however, and they were punished with eternal separation and a curse that robbed them of their memories.
The moon sisters Aria, Sonnet and Canon witness the disaster that befell the Seelie ancestor and the traveler from afar and mourn their fate. For unknown reasons, their silver carriage is "overturned" while the "hall of stars" is destroyed. The three sisters eventually turn on and kill each other as well. One of their corpses now remains as the sole moon.
The wolves in Teyvat have a connection to the moon sisters and mourn their fate.
The lost civilization that created the Spiral Abyss has heavy connections to the moon and the Moon Sisters.
The Solar Chariot falls to the west of what is now Dunyu Ruins, creating The Chasm. This prosperous mining area would sustain the Dunyu area for thousands of years, up until the cataclysm 500 years ago. The tribespeople in the area repair it and eventually it returns to the sky.
In alternate versions of the tale, the Solar Chariot is not a literal chariot, but is instead a star which fell into the area now known as The Chasm and returned to the heavens of its own accord during the Archon War.
Following the calamity, the heartbroken Seelie withered away in their grief, turning into the small spirit-like forms that are seen today. Cursed to forget their pasts, they pursue the memories they have left by guiding travelers to their old dwelling places, the Seelie Courts.
The Seelie Courts in Enkanomiya are notably in better condition than those in Teyvat, which may suggest that the Seelie civilization came to an end around the same time that Enkanomiya fell into the ocean, and thus their courts have been exposed to fewer weather conditions than they would in Teyvat.
Not all Seelie withered away into their tiny spirit-like forms; a few managed to retain their humanoid forms. After the fall of the Seelie, a certain wolf-king (possibly Boreas) would meet one of its remnants who had not yet withered away, and befriended her. It is possible she is the "ancient god" from whom Boreas gained his god-like power.
A survivor of the Seelie race, heavily implied to be Nabu Malikata, went on to befriend Greater Lord Rukkhadevata and King Deshret.
The divine nails are cast
After the war ― The victor of the war — ostensibly the Primordial One — became known as the Heavenly Principles and forbade knowledge of the history that predated this war.
When the people of Enkanomiya attempt to return to the surface a year after building the Dainichi Mikoshi, they are unable to find a way out. They believe this "power of prohibition" to be the work of the Primordial One and conclude that the Primordial One emerged victorious over the Second Who Came.
Sal Vindagnyr (Dragonspine)
Main article: Mondstadt/History §Sal Vindagnyr (Dragonspine)
A group of people seeking refuge from a land of snow and strife find a bountiful and green mountain. They erect a monument on its peak and establish a civilization there, naming it Sal Vindagnyr, and the mountain Vindagnyr. Over time they built a large and extravagant castle on the mountain.
Starsilver is an ore that is native to Vindagnyr, as the Snow-Tombed Starsilver was created long before Durin crashed onto the mountain.
The civilization has a large white tree of great significance, and the princess is born under this tree. Her mother, the priestess, passes her blessings on to the princess, which include the ability to foresee events in the future.
At some point later, the princess has a dream of Durin spreading poison upon the land. The people fear that this prophecy is a curse upon them.
For some unknown amount of time, Celestia is moored above the mountain of Vindagnyr.
The Skyfrost Nail descends from the skies, shrouding the city with clouds and snowstorms. One day, it shatters into three fragments, one of which turns the Irminsul tree into the Frostbearing Tree. The outlander Imunlaukr is living in the kingdom at the time, and the princess gives him a greatsword made of starsilver as he leaves to find answers. She promises to make a fresco for him, hoping to meet again.
The princess is working on a fresco and her father, the priest, goes up the mountain for guidance since the trees are starting to wither. He hopes that the princess' third painting will be of melting snow, but unfortunately she's unable to finish the painting. The Skyfrost Nail splits in three pieces, then fragments further, releasing three orbs that freeze particular locations, including shattering the white tree. The princess takes the most complete branch and tries to graft it onto another tree, but it withers and she dies next to it. Someone else comes along trying to heal the leylines, but is unable to and buries the princess.
Imunlaukr returns, finding everyone dead. He stores the greatsword made of starsilver among the frescoes and then goes off to fight in a war since he's decided Celestia only cares for bloodshed.
Liyue
Main article: Liyue/History §The Great War
>6000 years ago — Morax, a god with dominion over Geo, is born.
~6000 years ago, while Morax was young — The Solar Chariot falls to the west of what is now Dunyu Ruins, creating The Chasm. This prosperous mining area would sustain the Dunyu area for thousands of years, up until the cataclysm 500 years ago. The tribespeople in the area repair it and eventually it returns to the sky.
In alternate versions of the tale, the Solar Chariot is not a literal chariot, but is instead a star which fell into the area now known as The Chasm and returned to the heavens of its own accord during the Archon War.
The Spiritstone at the bottom of the present day Chasm is a Divine Nail implied to have been cast down during this time period, but it's relationship with the Solar Chariot is unknown.
The ancient civilization in this area is destroyed, and the inhabitants move to Chenyu Vale.
Tsurumi Island
Main article: Inazuma/History §Tsurumi Island
>6000 years ago ― An eagle known as the Thunderbird spots a fog-covered Tsurumi Island and decides to make its home there. At some point, objects fall from the heavens — possibly the Divine Nail —, one of which lands on Tsurumi Island. This temporarily clears up the fog, only for the fog to return in even greater force later, and the first civilization comes to an end.
Humans on the island (likely descendants of the previous civilization) begin gathering the Thunderbird's shed feathers and worship it, but the bird does not think much of them. The people learned to use Maushiro to locate each other amidst the fog, and they feared and worshipped the eagle. However, the Thunderbird paid them no heed, seeing them as no different from other animals.
Enkanomiya
Main article: Inazuma/History §Enkanomiya
The people of Enkanomiya clash with the Dragonheir of the Depths, vishaps who fled into the ocean depths after the Heavenly Principles defeated the Seven Sovereigns of the old world. Because there was no light in the ocean depths, the vishaps had a great advantage.
Istaroth, the undying wind and presumably one of the Heavenly Principles's four shining shades, is the only one who does not forsake the people of Enkanomiya, as they are able to detect her undying wind from the depths of the ocean.
The sage Aberaku (originally known as Abrax) builds the Dainichi Mikoshi (which he dubbed "Helios"), creating artificial light to drive away the vishaps. It is believed that Istaroth granted Abrax wisdom.
|1 year after the Dainichi Mikoshi's construction ― People attempt to find the way back to the surface, but are unable to. They interpret this as a ban from the Heavenly Principles, and that meant the Heavenly Principles had defeated the Second Who Came.
? years ago ― A cabal of corrupt nobles manipulates the people of Enkanomiya into worshipping the Dainichi Mikoshi as a god, and chose a child to be the Sunchild and rule over the land. The Sunchildren were puppet rulers controlled by these nobles. Abrax, and later Spartacus (Supada no Hiko), opposed the corrupted nobles only to be imprisoned by the Sunchildren.
Sumeru
Main article: Sumeru/History §The Great War
A member of the original Seelie race, heavily implied to be Nabu Malikata, survives the downfall of the Seelie race.
Fontaine
Main article: Fontaine/History §The Great War
Sometime following its defeat, the original Hydro Dragon withers away.
According to the Oceanids, Egeria is created as the Primordial Sea's new heart by the Shade of Life, a divine envoy and one of the Heavenly Principles's Four Shades. Despite being created by a "ruler of humans," Egeria is created entirely from material originating from Teyvat.
No new Hydro Dragon can be born so long as Egeria resides within the Primordial Sea.
Khaenri'ah
Main article: Khaenri'ah/History §The Great War
? years ago ― Around the time of Sal Vindagnyr's fall, the Kingdom of Khaenri'ah is established as a godless nation.
Currently Unknown Regions of Teyvat
? years ago — The Beast of Thunder enslaved a group of people with lightning and wreaked havoc on the land. The Thundersoother, whose family was killed in some sort of sacrifice, went to the cave of the Beast of Thunder, which was either near or in a volcano. He fought and beheaded the Beast of Thunder, and received a crown for his accomplishment, but spent his final days in solitude.
? years ago — The Berserker's homeland was consumed by flame during a war between gods and mortals. Seemingly the only survivor and a powerful warrior, the Berserker's iron mask was burned onto his face when his homeland fell and he went insane from the desire for revenge against Celestia. He went on a rampage, fighting humans, monsters and gods alike over time. At one point he even apparently fought a single giant monster for several years before killing it. However, it seems he eventually died, either in battle or after defeating whatever his last enemy was.
The Interim Period

While not formally established as its own period in time, Liyue lore indicates there was a stretch of peacetime between the Great War and the Archon War.

Mondstadt
Old Mondstadt
Main article: Mondstadt/History §Old Mondstadt

Note: Very little information exists about the region of Mondstadt before the fall of Decarabian's Mondstadt during the Archon War. As a result, the order of events and information listed may be highly inaccurate.

? years ago ― An ancient civilization in the Windwail Highland area establishes Cecilia Garden, where they grew Cecilia flowers in greenhouses.
Based on the architectural and ornamentation style of the ruins around Cecilia Garden, it may have been constructed by Decarabian or people from his civilization. However, there is currently no textual evidence of any link between Cecilia Garden and Decarabian's Mondstadt.
? years ago ― An ancient civilization at Starsnatch Cliff establishes the Sommernachtgarten. When the civilization fell, the Sommernachtgarten was buried underground and became Midsummer Courtyard.
? years ago ― At some point, Boreas, known as the King of the North Wind (or some variation thereof), gains his powers from an ancient god and becomes a god himself.
? years ago ― Decarabian establishes his capital city, Mondstadt, in the area now known as Stormterror's Lair. His territory expands to the Brightcrown Mountains and Windwail Highland areas, going as far south as the Teleport Waypoint between Dawn Winery and Stone Gate.
Brightcrown Canyon was once filled with Decarabian's soldiers, guarding the entrance to the city. The city, meanwhile, was arranged in a circular formation around Decarabian's tower. Residents were assigned their own spots within the city.
Decarabian's tower — which is already located in a very deep valley compared to the rest of modern-day Mondstadt and Liyue — extends even deeper into the ground. However, attempting to reach the bottom level of the aboveground portion of the tower results in an abrupt black screen, after which the player will find themselves on the wind current ledge above it and see unique out-of-bounds dialogue from Paimon: "Watch out! Don't go near there!"
? years ago ― The region of Mondstadt is filled with blizzards, turning it into an inhospitable wasteland. It is caused by Boreas, although whether it was intentional or not is somewhat ambiguous. To protect his city from the blizzards, Decarabian creates a storm wall around it.
Liyue
Guili Assembly
Main article: Liyue/History §Guili Assembly
See also: Guili Assembly

Note: The two main sources of information about the Guili Assembly, Stone Tablet Compilations: Vol. I and the World Quest Treasure Lost, Treasure Found, currently contradict each other on whether Guizhong or Morax descended on the land first and which one moved to the area afterwards. Because Stone Tablet Compilations has more information corroborated by other in-game sources, the wiki will assume it has the correct version.

? years ago — Morax descends on the region of Liyue, where he raises Mt. Tianheng, quells the seas, and lowers the tides. To pacify the seas, he defeats many sea monsters including one beast known as Baqiu. Jueyun Karst was created in such a way at an unknown point in time, with the water being drawn into an underground reservoir.
? years ago — Guizhong, the Lord of Dust, befriends Morax. At some point, she and her people move north of Mt. Tianheng for reasons unknown. Morax and Guizhong establish the Guili Assembly, which derives its name from the first character of Guizhong's name, and one character of Morax's (using his name at the time, which is unknown). This civilization spanned the area between Mt. Tianheng and Stone Gate. It was extremely prosperous, flourishing under the trades of agriculture and mining, and became a trading hub.
Guizhong establishes four commandments to guide her people:
"To unite in ambition is to be steadfast and immovable for all time."
"Wisdom is like water, it nourishes all those who receive it and in it is a reflection of the truth."
"Fortify the bones, that movement be supple when the time comes."
"Virtue grows tall like a tree, though there be shade it will flourish forever."
Guizhong and Cloud Retainer, among other adepti, create the Guizhong Ballistas to defend the Guili Assembly from external threats.
Lisha Civilizations
Main article: Liyue/History §Lisha Civilizations

Note: It is unknown whether the Sea God truly existed or whether he had any link to the Lisha region, but his story and the legends regarding Lisha seem to have some relation.

? years ago — Early civilizations in the Lisha region of Liyue are established at Dunyu Ruins, Lingju Pass, Qingxu Pool. At some point either before or during the Archon War, the civilizations at Lingju Pass and Qingxu Pool were destroyed and submerged underwater, only reemerging after the end of the Archon War.
Legends say that these ruins predate the Geo Archon's rule over Liyue. The whole of Lisha was covered by water at the time of the Archon War, and back then this rocky outcrop was nothing more than a little islet that rose above the water's surface. After peace was restored, the region of Lisha unfurled once more as the tides withdrew, revealing the ancient buildings erected by the early peoples.
What [Soraya] told me was that these ruins were left behind by an evil god, whose name has been wiped from the record, and its people. But in the end, the sea gave way to forests and fields, the self-serving god was defeated, and the strongholds and temples of the ancient city the god's people once built were left to crumble. That is how Qingxu Pool came to be. The ruins were submerged until the long Archon War finally came to an end, emerging on the landscape as the tide subsided."
? years ago — The Sea God gives his people a year without storms and tsunamis in exchange for a human bride. After many generations, one such bride — whom he had permitted to return to the surface world — caused the destruction of her village after she asked for the Sea God's aid when her daughter was to be taken away from her to be offered as his bride.
"The Sea God looked majestic indeed as he sat center stage in his giant clam, holding in his hands the reins of two sea serpents. They stood as imposing as Mt. Tianheng before the royal carriage as their master accepted the gifts of pearls from the village elders and welcomed his new bride aboard the carriage. In return, the village would receive the Sea God's blessing: a year free from tempests and tsunamis."
[...] The Sea God responded to the call, rising up from the billowing waves to greet the village. But his embrace was a tidal wave that engulfed the village, and took the villagers and elders in their sleep.
Chenyu Vale
Main article: Liyue/History §Chenyu Vale
The surviving inhabitants of the Chasm civilization relocates to Chenyu Vale.
Other Regions of Liyue
Main article: Liyue/History §Other Regions of Liyue
? years ago — Havria, the God of Salt, establishes her domain in Liyue; the original expanse of her territory is unknown, but it included Sal Terrae. She was known for being gentle and kind-hearted, but weak. It is theorized that Liyue's flower ball wedding tradition may have derived from Havria's act of handing out bunches of flowers to her followers.
? years ago — The village at Wuwang Hill is established. It would exist in relative peace until some time after Liyue Harbor was established, after which the bewitching song of a whale-like sea monster (potentially the Oceanid Rhodeia of Loch, considering the monster's physical description and current location) led all the youths of the village to their doom, and its elders died with no one to carry on the village.
Inazuma
Main article: Inazuma/History §The Interim Period

Invalid Transclusion

Sumeru
Main article: Sumeru/History §The Interim Period

Note: It is unclear when the civilization of the three God-Kings, its destruction, and the span of various human city-states existed beyond "thousands of years ago," so they have been tentatively placed under the The Interim Period.

As the avatar of Irminsul, Greater Lord Rukkhadevata presumably came into existence at some point in time long in the past.
According to legend, King Deshret was a "son of the sky," but he was born after the fall of the Seelie and the Moon Sisters and only learned of their stories from an unspecified woman (likely Nabu Malikata or Greater Lord Rukkhadevata).
Fontaine
Main article: Fontaine/History §The Interim Period
According to legend, the first Oceanid is born after Egeria sheds the "first tear," which later gives birth to all other Oceanids. Egeria bestows a task to the Oceanids "to seek an understanding of the diverse array of species and to love every creature."
To fulfill Egeria's desire to connect everyone in the world, the Oceanids disperse across the waters of Teyvat to act as "spies." However, Rhodeia of Loch denies any ulterior motive on Egeria's part.
Some Oceanids soon desire to live on the surface, having seen and envied human life. Not wanting to refuse her followers, Egeria decides to fulfill their request by taking water from the Primordial Sea and pouring it into the Oceanids' "blood" vessels, thus creating humanoid forms for them to walk on land.
Celestia deems Egeria's "act of life" a sin and sentences her to be sealed for her crimes. At some point, Fontainians learn of a prophecy claiming that water levels would rise and eventually, the people of Fontaine will be dissolved in order to wash their sins, reverting back into what they once were.
The Archon War (?–2000 years ago)
Main article: Archon War

Note: The term "Archon War" is a catch-all term for the various, scattered conflicts across Teyvat to determine who would become one of The Seven, which arose as a result of the creation of the Gnoses. Due to the timeline's ambiguity, this section also includes events after the divine nails were cast down.

? years ago — Seven divine seats in Celestia open up, causing the gods to become embroiled in a bitter struggle for supremacy.
Many gods fought for the sake of their ideals for a prosperous humanity. "That which lurks within and animates this relic are the divine remains of lamenting gods. They are unrealized ideals, designs for a prosperous humanity that could never be."
During the Archon War, the infighting amongst gods was but one cause of conflict in Teyvat; other creatures and entities also sought to expand their domains, taking advantage of the chaos to encroach on the continent.
In Liyue, legends of sea monsters are commonplace due to the "other-shore," a region that lies outside of Teyvat. People in ancient times would use the bones of such sea monsters as figureheads on their ships to frighten away the beasts.
Mondstadt
The Age of Kings(?–2600 years ago)
Main article: Mondstadt/History §The Age of Kings (?–2600 years ago)
See also: Decarabian's Mondstadt
>~2600 years ago ― Boreas declares war on Decarabian, but fails to land even a scratch on Mondstadt. The war between the two Kings of Ice and Frost turns into a stalemate, and Decarabian's people begin to view his rule as one of despotism and tyranny.
A boy only known as the Nameless Bard befriends a tiny, insignificant wind spirit that would later become Barbatos. The boy dreamt of seeing birds in flight, green grass, and the world outside the city.
The clan now known as the Gunnhildr Clan once dwelled inside Mondstadt. However, Gunnhildr's father, the clan's leader, grew disillusioned by Decarabian's despotic control and led his people out of the city. Outside the city was only relentless cold and engulfing blizzards, however, and the clan struggled to survive. As they prayed for salvation, a wind spirit that would later be known as Barbatos responded to their prayers, as did the God of Time. The clan's faith in the spirit empowers it, granting it more powers that it uses to create a shelter for them.
The first wines are brewed in Mondstadt when a certain mischievous wind spirit takes the form of a fox and ferments some apples under a negligent guard's care. When the guard awoke, he bit into one of those apples and, finding that he enjoyed the flavor, squeezed the sack that contained the apples to create wine. Also brewed in ancient times was a wine said to make a person forget the past, used so the people could have the strength to keep surviving.
Inside Old Mondstadt, people who grew discontent with Decarabian's rule began planning a resistance. The "Windblume" was used as a code word amongst the resistance, with the Red-Haired Warrior among the first to use this codeword.
Leonard the Adventurer invents the wind glider. His life goal is to scale Pilos Peak (now Musk Reef), but he fails his attempt and is forced to turn back. He writes the book "Of Mountains and Seas" as an account of his journey.
Boreas realizes that his blizzards could not nurture life and decides that between his powers and his disillusionment with human society, he did not have the qualifications to become one of the Seven Archons. He chooses to allow his physical body to die while his powers flowed into the land of Mondstadt to nourish it. Despite losing his original physical form, Boreas' spirit remains extant and his powers are still strong enough that he can manifest a body of ice and wind.
2600 years ago ― Decarabian's people rise up in rebellion, led by the Nameless Bard, Barbatos (then known as the "elf" or "wind spirit"), Decarabian's former lover Amos, a knight (originally referring to the Red-Haired Warrior, now possibly referring to Gunnhildr), and the Red-Haired Warrior. The Gunnhildr Clan, led by its current namesake Gunnhildr, also participates in the battle. Decarabian is slain in the battle, as are Amos and the Nameless Bard. With Decarabian's death, Barbatos is elevated to godhood himself. He uses his newfound powers to create a vessel in the form of the Nameless Bard's, and takes up the bow in honor of Amos.
The Red-Haired Warrior, for reasons unclear, turns his back on Barbatos and his name is eventually forgotten by the people of Mondstadt, though his deeds are still remembered. He eventually has a family that would eventually produce Ragnvindr and the Ragnvindr Family.
Using his powers, Barbatos reshapes Mondstadt, using his winds to blow away the snow and ice covering the land and terraforming the region of Mondstadt in the process. Among the notable changes to Mondstadt's landscape was the eradication of Pilos Peak, which was turned into the modern-day Musk Reef. He then takes his people from Decarabian's old city and moves to Cider Lake, where they build the modern city of Mondstadt. Prominent clans among them are:
The Gunnhildr Clan, led by Gunnhildr,
The Imunlaukr Clan, whose leader at the time is unknown, and
The Lawrence Clan, led by Venerare.
The God of Time worked alongside Barbatos for Mondstadt's protection, and both were worshipped by the Mondstadters of old as the "winds of time," with the belief that "Anemo brings stories while Time nurtures them." However, at some point in time, the worship of the God of Time as well as most records of them disappear and are forgotten.
? years ago, after the establishment of Mondstadt ― Seeing that his people had enough wisdom and strength to live on their own, Barbatos departs so he would not be able to become a tyrant.
The Windblume Festival is established in memory of those who fought for freedom during Decarabian's reign. The codeword Windblume became conflated with literal flowers, while the festival became one about finding love.
Haar Islands (Golden Apple Archipelago)
Main article: Golden Apple Archipelago/History §The Archon War (?–2000 Years ago)
<2600 years ago ― Minacious Isle travels from Mondstadt to Haar Islands, having been broken off of a mountain and turned upside down after Barbatos terraforms Mondstadt. With it comes a Seelie.
Liyue
The Fall of the Guili Assembly
Main article: Liyue/History §The Fall of the Guili Assembly
3700 years ago — One particular battle occurs in the Guili Assembly — despite being a nation protected by Morax, Guizhong, and the adepti, it ravages Guili Plains and causes landslides that transform Dihua Marsh from a fertile islet into a swamp. Guizhong is also slain in the process. The exact cause of its destruction is unknown and many theories exist among Liyue folklore.
>10 days later — Following the fall of the Guili Assembly, Morax, Marchosius, and the adepti lead their people south of Mt. Tianheng, where they establish Liyue Harbor. Morax creates a contract with the adepti to defend it.
The Millelith Brigade is established to protect the people and defend against monsters.
Morax teaches his people how to create houses, using Mora to create a model home. He also establishes minted Mora as Liyue's currency, for convenience.
After creating Liyue Harbor, Morax decides to wage war against the other gods, seeing it as the only way to restore order and protect humanity.
"He sought celestial order, to stay the tide of turbulence.
Adepti rallied round him, yaksha guardians charged ahead,
Frightened by the courageous people the demons fled."
"I wish not for dominion, yet I cannot watch the common people suffer."
December 2, >3000 years ago — Sometime either before or during the Archon War, Ganyu is born. She later participates in the war to protect Liyue Harbor, signing a contract with Morax.
There are no details on when exactly she was born, however it is speculated that Ganyu may have been alive during the Guili Assembly era based on the wording in her third Character Story.
During one battle, Ganyu — who was much more rotund during this time — unintentionally chokes a monster to death when it underestimated her girth and tried to eat her. This incident has led her to maintain a strict diet in order to keep a slim physique.
>2000 years ago — Morax hears the pleas of Azhdaha, a blind Geo elemental dragon who dwelt beneath the mountains of Nantianmen. He takes pity on the dragon and takes it aboveground, bestowing sight upon it with just a touch. They form a contract, where Azhdaha agrees not to endanger humanity in exchange for living alongside them. Azhdaha then aids Morax in battles across Teyvat.
3700–2000 years ago — The following events presumably occur sometime between Liyue Harbor's establishment and the end of the Archon War. The events are listed in a tentative chronological order, but there is no confirmation on when exactly they occurred relative to the present.
During a certain battle in the Archon War, the opposing god slashes Mt. Tianheng, creating a crack in the mountain's foundation and threatening to collapse on the village at the base of the mountain. To prevent this, the adeptus Skybracer has a friend cut off his antlers — a gift from Morax himself, made of his divine essence and thus the hardest material in Liyue — and uses them to prop up the mountain. This act causes the mountains to elevate higher than it had been originally. Skybracer then continues to fight until he dies from blood loss, his blood turning into the Bishui River. The people who lived at the base of the mountain held him in high regard for this action, even more so than Morax.
Havria, whose gentle nature and weak martial prowess put her at a disadvantage during this brutal era, futilely attempted to peacefully resolve the conflicts that erupted. Realizing it was too late for anyone to stop, she turned her efforts to creating a place of refuge for humans displaced by these wars. However, due to her relatively weak powers, she stood no chance against other gods and chose to make concession after concession, until she lost all her lands besides Sal Terrae. There, she created a small city with her followers — but they, seeing that she had no chance of surviving through this war, decided to give her a swift and painless end rather than consign her to defeat at the hands of other gods. However, the power that surged from her body after her death salinified the city and its inhabitants, while her own body withered away into a small salt flower.
Her followers who managed to escape salinification were scattered across Liyue after the loss of their god and home. Many went to Liyue Harbor and eventually became Yinyuan Hall of the salt industry, one of the Eight Trades. Some descendants of those people, fearing Havria cursed them for their ancestors' betrayal, risked their lives to enter Sal Terrae and break the sword used to kill her. By the time of the present, however, Havria's story has been twisted among the people of Yinyuan Hall, and they now believe she was a powerful god who was assassinated by Morax out of envy.
Morax defeats many gods and sea monsters at Guyun Stone Forest, including the ancient god Osial, by throwing down massive stone spears to pin them to the ocean floor, and using Sigils of Permission to seal them. The resulting stone formation, when viewed from above, takes the general shape of his own Geo symbol.
~2600 years ago — Chi (in the ancient language, Qingce) makes its nest in the area now known as Mt. Qingce and takes over the region. Morax fights it at a "great height" and succeeds in subduing it.
In fantastical Liyue legends, although Zhongli (Morax) reveals they are merely the product of people's imagination, Chi and its nest transform the area around Mt. Qingce into its current state after its death — its body turns into stone, its blood becomes water, and its scales turn into terraced fields. Even after its death, however, Chi's power seeps into the land, creating the Blood-Fed Trees and suspicious orange stones at Bishui Plain that poisoned the area. To suppress its power, Morax seals its remains in five different locations with Geo Seals and water to prevent its revival.
People during this time used images to record major events, purportedly because writing had not yet been invented. The veracity of this claim is dubious since the ruins at Guili Plains use written language, although it is possible that Chi was defeated long before the seals to contain it were created.
While combating the other gods and sea monsters, Morax used a variety of methods to combat them: along with massive stone spears (pillars), he also summoned meteors, a Geo Whale, and stone birds.
The original village at Wuwang Hill falls after a whale-tailed monster leads the youth to their death.
3000–2000 years ago — Alatus (Xiao), whose true name is yet unknown, is born. An evil god discovers his weakness, using it to enslave him and force him to perform cruel and violent acts. During one battle in the Archon War, the two ran afoul of Morax, who defeats the evil god and liberates Alatus, bestowing the name "Xiao" onto him for his protection. Xiao afterwards becomes one of the Yakshas to repay his debt to Morax.
? years ago — The bodies of the gods and monsters Morax defeated over the course of the Archon War were compressed, decomposed, and became part of the earth, while the gods' spirits lost their senses of self and were no longer capable of holding personal grudges. However, their lingering hatred and resentment still remained, creating miasmas, curses, and monsters. Morax summoned the yakshas, a certain subset of the adepti, to aid him in suppressing these manifestations of evil gods. They carried out this duty for some thousand years, even after the Archon War ended.
The five strongest Yakshas were Bosacius, Bonanus, Menogias, Indarias, and Alatus (Xiao). Among the lesser yakshas were Pervases, who was slain in the Archon War.
? years ago — An unknown doctor takes the frontline in eradicating the karmic disease caused by the corpses of the malevolent gods whom the Yakshas had slain. The negative karma had become a pestilence that spread across Liyue. The bodies of the infected humans only furthered its spread, "as the dead were a breeding ground for the disease". The Rite of Homa prevented further spread by cremating corpses which, eventually, caused the epidemic to come to an end. Furthermore, the pioneers of this practice were the founders of what is now known as Wangsheng Funeral Parlor. The practice and parlor have been passed down from generation to generation. The quote of the family is "only an unbound flame can purify this world."
The rite conducted by the staff clears the corpses of traces of evil karma so they are able to free themselves and carry on to the afterlife. Their spirits take the form of an ashen butterfly. The doctors (who eventually became the directors of Wangsheng) have never had any regrets due to their altruistic lifestyle, and as such pass on without regrets, also in the form of a fiery butterfly.
>2000 years ago — After suppressing all other gods in his region, Morax becomes the Geo Archon, restoring peace to the land now known as Liyue.
Inazuma
Main article: Inazuma/History §The Archon War (?–2000 years ago)

Invalid Transclusion

Tsurumi Island
Main article: Inazuma/History §Tsurumi Island (The Archon War)

Invalid Transclusion

Sumeru
Main article: Sumeru/History §The Archon War (?–2000 years ago)

* Nabu Malikata, Greater Lord Rukkhadevata, and King Deshret befriend each other and become known as the God-Kings of Sumeru.

At some point in time, Nabu Malikata foresaw the coming of the cataclysm. She creates a shard of Khvarena and leaves it in the care of Greater Lord Rukkhadevata.
Rukkhadevata would turn the shard into the divine bird Simurgh. She charged Simurgh with "the guardianship of the border between new birth and death".
Ay-Khanoum
Main article: Sumeru/History §Ay-Khanoum
Nabu Malikata, King Deshret, and Greater Lord Rukkhadevata — collectively known as the three God-Kings of Sumeru — build Ay-Khanoum, the "City of Amphitheaters." Its name means "City of the Moon Maiden" in the ancient language of the Jinn.
Nabu Malikata is said to have an "amicable relationship" with the Jinn.
According to some legends, King Deshret captured the Jinn in magic bottles marked by his seal, although the Jinn were also his willing servants in his cause of conquering the world. He created Ay-Khanoum as a city for the Jinn, while they created the entrance to the Mausoleum of King Deshret.
Nabu Malikata dies "due to the malice of the burning sun and yellow sand" and the city of Ay-Khanoum is destroyed.
Nabu Malikata desired a "spectacular death" so that the bitterness of her death would preserve her legacy forever. King Deshret, who was enamored with her, never realized this, sending him into an obsessive spiral over the shared vision the three God-Kings once had.
The "promised land of 'Valivija'" is buried by the desert sands, which may correspond with Ay-Khanoum.
Following the fall of Ay-Khanoum and the death of Nabu Malikata, King Deshret and Greater Lord Rukkhadevata parted ways to create their own civilizations.
Dharma Forest
Main article: Sumeru/History §Dharma Forest

Note: Events in this section are currently assumed to be concurrent with King Deshret's Civilization and Gurabad.

After separating from King Deshret, Greater Lord Rukkhadevata comes to the East of the Great Red Sand and creates the Varuna Contraption that terraforms part of desert into a rainforest.
At the border between the forest and the desert, the Wall of Samiel was erected to prevent the forest from undergoing desertification.
After the forest labyrinth was created, the lord of the forest Viaghara was born from the moon's reflection on the water, resembling a tiger in shape.
With the help of her followers, who would go on to establish the Amurta Darshan of Sumeru Akademiya, Rukkhadevata developed a flourishing rainforest. Sumeru City was built on the Divine Tree, a particularly massive tree located in Sumeru's forest region, and the sages of Sumeru Akademiya assisted Rukkhadevata in managing the nation's affairs.
Rukkhadevata also created the Aranara, small plantlike creatures with the ability to control dreams.
Thousands of years ago ― Rukkhadevata briefly returns to the desert to help rescue King Deshret's people from the effects of forbidden knowledge, and creates the Akasha System to help combat it by uniting the people's wisdom. However, the endeavor exhausts much of her strength and shrinks her into the stature of a child.
King Deshret's Civilization
Main article: Sumeru/History §King Deshret's Civilization
While Rukkhadevata creates a rainforest in a corner of the desert, Deshret continues ruling over the Great Red Sand.
Thousands of years ago ― King Deshret eventually succumbs to the "poison" of forbidden knowledge.
The forbidden knowledge brings calamities upon Sumeru. "People's minds were filled with crazed whispers, dark gray scales spread across their bodies, even the land was stripped of its vigor."
King Deshret asks Greater Lord Rukkhadevata for help, for the sake of their mutual friend. The Lord of Verdure gathered the priests, instructing them to build temples and creating Aaru Village as the last bastion of Deshret's civilization. She also expended a great deal of her power to suppress forbidden knowledge and regressed into a childlike form. Even this, however, was not enough; in the end, Deshret sacrificed himself to finally put an end to it.
King Deshret's civilization fell and splintered into many smaller, human-led city-states.
Gurabad
Main article: Sumeru/History §Gurabad
The vassal city-state of Gurabad rises after the death of Nabu Malikata, during what is known as the vassal states era.
The story of Gurabad is first known with the vassal king Ormazd Shah. Ormazd has 300 kins, one of them is Shirin, the half-fairy daughter of him and the fairy foremother Liloufar. Liloufar's three prophecies and three admonitions later become the ultimate destruction of Gurabad.
Ormazd adopts Kisra, and give him the surname "Parvez" for his enormous campaign.
Kisra Parvez and Shirin are married, though their marriage is not a happy one.
Shirin and Kisra murder Ormazd and his 300 heirs, and Kisra takes the title of the vassal king. He adds the name "ravan" to his bestowed surname, and now his name is Kisra Parvezravan.
The son of Parvezravan and Shirin is born, and is named Shiruyeh. Fearing Liloufar's admonitions, Parvezravan banishes his son, forces him to cover his face, and forbids him to set foot into Gurabad.
Shirin disguises herself as a divine princess of the temple to the moon goddess, and gives Shiruyeh false divination to confront Parvezravan. After that, Shiruyeh assassinates his father, claims the throne, and is forgiven by his mother.
The reign of Shiruyeh does not last long, as he is forever tormented by inescapable nightmares, until one day he fell into a great black chasm during one such frenzy. After that, a great plague emerged from that chasm, and Gurabad, without its king, collapses due to the calamity and the sand.
The fate of Shirin is questionable: some people say that she was subdued by King Deshret, while others say that she is still searching for her son until today.
City-States Era
Main article: Sumeru/History §City-States Era
Thousands of years ago, after the extermination of forbidden knowledge ― Somehow, a man known as Shah Ramshahr comes to be credited with building the seven towers that were built during the eradication of forbidden knowledge. The towers, which are only known to have been built at the time of King Deshret's death, come to be known as the "Towers of Betrayal."
According to inscriptions in the desert, seven cities were built around the seven towers, among which included Ay-Khanoum (which was apparently rebuilt after its initial destruction), Gurabad (a rebuilt version), Saleh, and Tulaytullah.
Fontaine
Main article: Fontaine/History §The Archon War (?–2000 years ago)
Sometime after the fall of Gurabad in Sumeru, Remus arrives in the High Seas seeking a place to die. There, he accidentally discovers the ruins of a forgotten city and meets the city's only surviving inhabitants: Sybilla, a former envoy tasked with guarding the Irminsul tree there, and the other Golden Bees. They foretell that Remus was destined to come here; that he will create a new, prosperous and thriving nation; and that the nation's desire for justice will lead to its downfall. Remus' begrudging acceptance of his destiny causes the Irminsul to turn into a golden ship, which they use to establish the empire of Remuria over the waters.
Remus' reign is prosperous, becoming known as the "golden era" and the "grand symphony" of Fontaine. Remus is credited for helping his people develop agriculture, construct giant cities and temples, and spread the beauty of music and art. To push his dream of creating a harmonious, enlightened civilization, he uses the Fortuna to call other tribes to join the empire of Remuria and conquers any tribe which refuses to join him, such as the tribe which Erinnyes and Cassiodor hailed from.
After turning Remuria into a flourishing civilization, Remus' worries about its future leads him to seek a way to avert the destruction which Sybilla had prophesied. Though she believes it to be a futile effort, citing the rise and fall of civilizations as the law of Fortuna, she points him to Egeria, who was imprisoned in the depths of the Primordial Sea, to find a possible solution.
Scylla, who is guarding Egeria's prison, attacks him, and they battle for thirty days and thirty nights. Afterwards, their exhaustion gives Remus an opening to explain the reason for his arrival. Bemused by Remus' futile dream, Scylla grants him passage to visit Egeria.
To Remus' dismay, his meeting with Egeria yields no results, as Fontaine's fate was sealed by her "original sin" of creating a new race of humans using the Primordial Sea's power. Egeria gives Remus a goblet of primordial water, which he intends to use to "create a world of endless prosperity, one without conflict." Intrigued by Remus' ideals, Scylla decides to leave the Primordial Sea to join his cause.
Remus believes that so long as the "harmonious symphony of prosperity" continues to play, Remuria will prosper forever. He sets about perfecting his civilization, paying particular attention to his capital city, Capitolium.
Hoping to make Remuria's peoples escape the flood, he mixes the primordial water with an immortal stone to create a Golden Ichor who would contain the souls and minds of his peoples and places this Ichor full of souls into Golems, and tries to replace the entire Primordial Water with his golden Ichor.
To escape the prophecy, Remus aims to eliminate all which might bring about such destruction or who does not accept his rules: Lochfolks, Vishaps, Barbarians.
Barbarians and Vishaps eventually start a rebellion under the leadership of Scylla against Remus and his golem army and golden troupe.
Remus eventually realizes his wrongs while Remuria is being destroyed and gives out his final orders, attempting to restore peace back to Remuria.
The Harmost Boethius sees his retreat as a betrayal, steals the golden Ichor and seals the Dragon Scylla with it.
Remuria and its peoples are sunk under the sea at the same time the Dragon is sealed. The golden Ichor is eventually corroded by the Primordial Sea and the survivors turn back into "Barbarism and Annihilation".
After Remuria is destroyed by conflicts and rebellions, Celestia commands Egeria to return from her primeval prison to take over Remus' position and rule Fontaine.
Egeria returns to Fontaine and gathers the survivors, mediating between their feuds, and instructs them to establish new cities around flowing springs, thus commencing an era guided by law which endures to the present day. She is awarded a Gnosis, ascends as the Hydro Archon, and becomes one of The Seven.
Khaenri'ah
Main article: Khaenri'ah/History §The Archon War (?–2000 years ago)
? years ago ― Khaenri'ah is ruled by the Crimson Moon Dynasty.
At some point, the Crimson Moon Dynasty is replaced by the Eclipse Dynasty as the ruling dynasty of Khaenri'ah.
Perinheri arrives in Khaenri'ah from another world and is accepted into an orphanage.
Perinheri eventually becomes one of the mightiest figures in the kingdom, known as Perinheri the undefeated.
At some point, the development of Field Tillers (Ruin Guards) and other machines now known as Ruin Machines began, likely with the purpose of combating Celestia.
>2000 years ago ― A diplomatic team from Khaenri'ah, including Oogura and Ooshima, travels to Enkanomiya. The team attempted to steal the forbidden book Before Sun and Moon, but the attempt is thwarted by Antei, who managed to destroy their Ruin Guard at the cost of his own life.
Post-Archon War

2000 years ago — The Archon War comes to an end as the final divine seat in Celestia is claimed, cementing the positions of The Seven's original members. Defeated gods who refused to live under The Seven's rule fled to islands in the Dark Sea, where they became evil gods.
After Barbatos pays a visit to Morax — not in need of assistance, but rather to explore the neighboring country — the first iteration of The Seven would often gather in Liyue Harbor.
2000–500 years ago — Over the course of 1500 years, the original Cryo, Dendro, Electro, Hydro, and Pyro Archons pass away, leaving only Barbatos and Morax as the remnants of the original Seven. It is unknown how many times those positions have changed hands, but they have since been replaced by the Tsaritsa, the Lesser Lord Kusanali, Ei, Focalors, and Murata, respectively. Of them, the Lesser Lord Kusanali is the youngest, having been born after the cataclysm 500 years ago.
The original Seven's sworn duty to guide humanity is no longer honored by some of the newer Archons.
Mondstadt
Mondstadt's Aristocratic Period (2600–1000 years ago)
See also: Mondstadt Aristocracy
Early Aristocratic Period (2600–1600 years ago)
<2600 years ago ― Dvalin, an elemental dragon, is born from pure Anemo energy located in the high heavens. The birth of an elemental dragon is a rare occurrence, and such dragons are equal in strength to the gods; historically, they have come to blows with the gods of old. However, Barbatos befriended Dvalin and the dragon became the first among the Four Winds to be worshipped by humanity.
? years ago ― The Hexenzirkel challenged Barbatos into a fight, but he refused and offered to resolve the conflict through song instead. From then on, they became allies, and Barbatos agreed to conceal one of the group's meeting place and its lantern.
? years ago ― Barbatos departs, and a class of aristocrats blessed with divine powers arose as leaders of Mondstadt. The clans in the aristocracy derived their lineages from heroes who lived during the early ages of Barbatos' Mondstadt. Known clans include the Lawrence Clan, Gunnhildr Clan, and Imunlaukr Clan.
Venerare, leader of the Lawrence Clan at the time, built the Barbatos Statue in front of the Favonius Cathedral to commemorate Barbatos' descent. Beneath the statue was an inscription written by the leaders of the clans, pledging their defense of Mondstadt.
During this time, the people of Mondstadt worshipped both Barbatos and the God of Time. However, at some point, the God of Time and the worship of them were forgotten by the people of Mondstadt.
Many of the festivals and customs in Mondstadt were enacted by the aristocracy for the betterment of the common people. Such festivities included:
Hunting, a regular hobby of the aristocracy in which they worked alongside the common people and shared the spoils.
Ludi Harpastum, a 15-day festival which celebrates the blessings of wine, song, and flight Barbatos bestowed upon the people of Mondstadt.
Windblume, a festival that celebrates the Thousand Winds.
Weinlesefest, a festival that celebrates the return of the Anemo Archon when the west wind blows every fall during the harvest season.
2600–500 years ago ― The incident known as "The Tyrant's Final Fury" occurs.
For about one year, the first Field Tiller shot missiles from Stormterror's Lair at anyone who approached. The first Field Tiller had wandered into the abandoned tower of Decarabian after being damaged by Lupus Boreas, who mistook it for a challenger when it wandered into his arena.
Late Aristocratic Period (1600–1000 years ago)
? years ago ― Ursa the Drake starts terrorizing Mondstadt.
? years ago ― The Lawrence Clan became the foremost clan in Mondstadt and became the main rulers of the city. However, they grew corrupt and fell to degeneracy, eventually becoming tyrants who enslaved and tormented the common people while viewing themselves as overlords and kings.
The Gunnhildr Clan allegedly maintained its honor, but were less influential than the Lawrence Clan which ruled Mondstadt. The status and fate of the Imunlaukr Clan are unknown, while other clans among the aristocracy followed the Lawrence Clan's lead.
? years ago ― The aristocracy used various methods to control the people and keep them ignorant. Anyone who posed a threat to their reign was enslaved and used for labor or entertainment; knowledge of the past was suppressed, and cultural and historical relics that would point towards the truth were taken down.
The knight order at the time, who referred to themselves as the "starlit knights," served the aristocracy and upheld its degeneracy, using their strength to oppress the commoners.
The royal mages no longer instilled virtue in the nobles, and instead helped them keep the people ignorant. The Church also used their influence to justify the aristocracy's actions and keep the commoners from realizing the truth.
The Church of Favonius suffers a schism, with the higher-ranked clergy backing the nobility.
>1010 years ago ― Vennessa and her younger sister Lind are born into a nomadic tribe of the southern plains, exiled from its homeland for reasons unknown.
1010 years ago ― After running afoul of Ursa the Drake and being starved by the dragon over the course of several days, she and her people flee to Mondstadt, only to be enslaved by the aristocracy. Because of her great strength, Vennessa was made into a gladiator, bound by chains. The chains themselves could not bind her; as a child of Murata, Mondstadt's ordinary-quality ores and lack of her homeland's divine flame meant its metals were nothing before her strength. What kept her subservient was her responsibility to her people.
~>1000 years ago ― Eberhart, an illegitimate heir to Landrich's clan, was a particularly manipulative and ruthless figure who lived at the end of the aristocratic era. He grew up in a noble home with his older half-brothers, Parsifal and Ingbert. Due to his illegitimacy, he was never looked on the same way as his older half-brothers which bred discontentment within Eberhart. He also knew how far the aristocracy had fallen from its golden days and sought to restore the ancient aristocracy's glory. To this end, he used his cunning to become a key figure in the aristocracy's downfall.
? years ago ― Eberhart goaded his older half-brother Parsifal's love of chivalry and play-acting, convincing him to become a Phantom Thief, then deceived him in some unknown manner, forcing Parsifal to flee Mondstadt and removing him from the line of succession.
During the late Aristocratic Period, spears and polearms came to be viewed as weapons used by lowly commoners and slaves, likened to gladiators' weapons compared to the noble and elegant sword. However, Eberhart secretly trained to use one in order to overthrow the aristocracy, and even became the disciple of the witch who created the Crescent Pike, using her love for Parsifal to get close to her before discovering her weakness and killing her. It appears that he took up the lance to gain an element of surprise against Ingbert, a Vision user, who would have easily bested him in combat otherwise.
>1000 years ago ― The Wanderer's Troupe is established, comprised of people from all over Teyvat. It was both a musical troupe and a militaristic troop, gaining the moniker "Swordsman's Troupe" as they traveled throughout the continent. At one point, they faced an unknown foe in the Mare Jivari, and they made their final stop in the City of Mondstadt. They tried and failed to overthrow the aristocracy, and most of its members were slain during the battle, enslaved afterwards, or fled. Known members include:
The founding member was the Conductor who wielded The Widsith, a collection of the Troupe's travels and musical compositions. He was slain in battle.
The Sojourner, also known as the harpist and lyrist, who wielded The Stringless. He hailed from Fontaine and left his home country in search of his true fate. He was the second member of the Troupe, having met the conductor by chance. He fell in love with a Mondstadt girl, only for her to be chosen as the Ludi Harpastum princess — which meant she would be claimed by a member of the Lawrence Clan. In the attempted rebellion, he lost his life to protect his allies.
The Dawnlight Swordswoman, also known as the sword dancer, wielded The Flute and was the third to join the Troupe. She was enslaved after the attempted rebellion and turned into a gladiator, where she ultimately met her end. Even while enslaved, she sang of freedom and openly questioned the aristocracy's reign and the people's acceptance of their rule. Her interactions with Ragnvindr inspired him to rise up against the aristocracy, and he adopted her epithet in his title, "Dawn Knight."
Kreuzlied, who abandoned the Lawrence Clan, was the fourth to join the Troupe. He wielded The Bell and is the only known survivor of the Troupe, spared because of his lineage. Despite the Troupe's disbandment, Kreuzleid did not give up resisting the aristocracy; he established an underground organization, which would remain active even 500 years later, and used it to aid Vennessa's rebellion.
500 years later, it was secretly used by Rostam to aid the Knights of Favonius from the shadows. It is unknown whether the organization is still active in present day.
? years ago ― After many years of loyally fighting under his master Eberhart, the Gladiator who wielded the Deathmatch (and who the Gladiator's Finale set belongs to) meets his end at Vennessa's hands. Despite fighting many bloody battles for Eberhart's and his own glory, even after he had already won his freedom — having been manipulated by Eberhart into continuing — the Gladiator finds that Eberhart had already left the scene for reasons unknown.
~1000 years ago, after the Gladiator's death ― Landrich organizes an aristocracy-led expedition to Sal Vindagnyr, hoping that the expedition will be a great success and their achievements will quell those hoping to rebel against the aristocracy. The expedition party included Ingbert, Eberhart, Luther, Nick, and several other promising young aristocrats. However, the expedition party never returned, so documentation on the event is sparse.
Sometime after arriving at the mountain, the team gets caught in a snowstorm and the unnamed members get separated from the others, who meet up at the South Base Camp. Eberhart convinces the others that the unnamed members should be able to find their way back to the camp, and additionally persuades them to investigate a secret room that supposedly contains frescoes and weapons forged from starsilver.
Not only are they unable to open the locked door of the secret room, but a cave-in kills Nick, burying his supplies with him. Returning to the South Base Camp, they notice the unnamed members have still not returned and Luther hopes they made it back down the mountain to get help. They decide to return to the original plan of exploring the cellar in the southwestern ruins once the storm dies down a bit.
Eberhart leads Ingbert and Luther into the cellar and then takes out a polearm, striking Ingbert first and trying to kill them both. While he gravely injures both, Ingbert uses his Vision to launch a counterattack, forcing him to retreat heavily injured. While bleeding out in the cellar, Luther realizes Eberhart's large-scale scheme, writing down an apology to Priscilla before leaving a message for whoever reads the journal to warn Landrich.
After leaving the cellar, Eberhart takes refuge in an area where a prison used to be and plans to follow the waterway to where his supplies are hidden. Either at the prison or between there and the supplies, Ingbert catches up to him and Eberhart manages to kill him. Eberhart then heads east to reach the sea and finds his boat and more supplies untouched. He then leaves for Mondstadt with the knowledge that if news reaches the city, Priscilla — who unbeknownst to Luther, was one of Eberhart's co-conspirators — will warn him by lighting a torch at Stormbearer Point. However, there are no records of Eberhart's return, leaving his ultimate fate a mystery.
Eberhart's boat never reaches the shore and the waiting Priscilla gets caught by the nobles after the plot is revealed.
Mondstadt Reborn (1000–500 years ago)
1000 years ago, after Ludi Harpastum ― The prayers and cries of the oppressed awakens Barbatos from his slumber, and he descends on Mondstadt under the guise of Venti. He befriends Vennessa after she raised the ire of Barca Lawrence, the heir to the Lawrence Clan, and was sentenced to undergo a series of gladiator matches to win her and her people's freedom. Her last battle is against Ursa the Drake itself, as Lord Lawrence had bartered with the evil dragon to give Mondstadt peace with her and her tribe as an offering. At this moment, Barbatos descends on the battlefield and reveals his true form, giving Vennessa the power to prevail against Ursa and freeing the people from the aristocracy's villainy.
The above is the official history recorded by Mondstadt's historians. However, this was the beginning of a longer rebellion, during which Barbatos forged a contract between the aristocracy and Morax, claiming that the aristocrats had sold all of Mondstadt to the Geo Archon — including their own troops. After it was discovered, this "treachery against the wind" caused the troops to rally against the aristocracy, hastening its end. Only many years later did scholars discover that this treaty was fake.
Ragnvindr and Kreuzlied are among those who assisted Vennessa's rebellion, as were adherents to the Church of Favonius mobilized by the Nameless Shepherd. It is unclear whether the rebellion Eberhart intended to assist when he sabotaged the Dragonspine expedition was Vennessa's, or if it was a different one that was being plotted around the same time.
After Vennessa's rebellion succeeded, most of the aristocracy and those who had collaborated with them, such as the royal mages, are exiled from Mondstadt. Those who proved themselves uncorrupted, such as the Gunnhildr Clan, were allowed to remain.
Vennessa establishes the Knights of Favonius, with herself as its first Dandelion Knight and Grand Master, and restores the Church of Favonius to prevent tyrants from taking over Mondstadt again.
After the Knights of Favonius was established, a certain Knight of Boreas arrives at Mondstadt and joins them. However, the wolf companion he originally journeyed with chose not to follow him into the city, preferring the wilderness. The two continued to fight together whenever the Knight left the city to hunt or do battle. When the wolf dies of old age, the Knight buries it in the remote countryside and leaves the Knights of Favonius to become a wanderer.
Ragnvindr converts the aristocrats' indoor bathhouse into the original Mondstadt Library. It would eventually become the largest library in all of northern Teyvat, up until the Great Fire of Fall Equinox reduced it to one-sixth of its original size.
The Barbatos Statue, which was originally erected by Venerare but taken down by the late aristocracy, is also restored, though the original inscription on it has been lost.
? years ago ― The Four Winds are established, with Boreas as Wolf of the North and Dvalin as Dragon of the East. Vennessa was simultaneously the Lion of the South (as the first Dandelion Knight) and Falcon of the West.
? years ago ― Vennessa is chosen by the gods and ascends to Celestia at Windrise. A massive oak tree grows where she stood when she ascended.
This tree has a mysterious connection to Celestia; Venti channels power from it to purify himself from the Abyss' influence, as well as to heal his body after getting his Gnosis forcefully taken by Signora.
? years ago ― The Great Fire of Fall Equinox reduces the Mondstadt Library to one-sixth of its former size. However, the contents within the library's restricted section, located behind the poplar doors in the library basement, were left untouched.
? years ago ― Boreas and his wolf pack did not originally live in Wolvendom, but moved there at an unknown point in time. It is unclear whether the Temple of the Wolf, located near the Thousand Winds Temple, formerly housed Boreas' spirit.
Liyue
After Barbatos pays a visit to Morax — not in need of assistance, but rather to explore the neighboring country — the first iteration of The Seven would often gather in Liyue Harbor.
2000 years ago — With their combat prowess no longer needed, some adepti seclude themselves in Jueyun Karst. Others ask Morax to transform their mortal bodies into stone, resulting in the stone figures seen around Liyue.
Unlike the adepti, the Yakshas suffered a gruesome fate. The hatred emanating from the demons tainted their souls, while the unending slaughters they participated in accrued karmic debt. One by one, the yakshas went mad, died, and/or disappeared.
Bonanus and Menogias most likely both died when the two fought against each other. Indarias went mad with fear and was also dead.
The Liyue Qixing, an organization comprised of the seven foremost businesspeople in Liyue Harbor, are established. Ganyu becomes secretary to the Liyue Qixing.
? years ago — A martial nomad named Guhua was known throughout Liyue; his life is shrouded in mystery, but some claim he was an adeptus and ascended to Celestia at the end of his journey. After his ascension, a person who was close to him established the Guhua Brotherhood in his honor.' After several hundred years, however, the organization dwindled and became the Guhua Clan.
March 3,? years ago — Qiqi is born as a human.
? years ago — During one of the battles between adepti and demons, the herb gatherer Qiqi ran afoul of the combatants and became trapped between life and death as a result. Her desire to live granted her a Vision, which the adepti saw as a divine blessing. To save her life, each gave her a portion of their adeptal energies; her life was indeed spared, but she was turned into a zombie, and her mortal vessel could not handle the adeptal power and she went berserk. To quell the disturbance, Mountain Shaper trapped her in amber, where she would remain for several hundred years.
>1000 years ago — Azhdaha begins to forget those around him, his memories eroding. Morax attempts to help him fix his deteriorating memory, but the solution doesn't work. He begins to become irritable, his spirit naturally angry for whatever reason.
1000 years ago — The people of Liyue mine in the mountains, overexploiting the area for resources. This causes the Ley Lines to quake, causing great suffering to Azhdaha, who is sustained and nourished by their energy. The pain, combined with his inability to recognize his loved ones, enrages him, and he attacks the Chasm in an attempt to stop his anguish. He destroys the settlement at Tianqiu Valley in the process.
Through the combined efforts of Morax, Mountain Shaper, Moon Carver, and a third currently unknown adeptus, Azhdaha is sealed in a pocket dimension at Nantianmen.
Inazuma

Fontaine
Egeria exiles all of the criminals from her nation, who live in misery as they are shunned by society.
Eventually, some of these criminals beg for forgiveness, which Egeria heard through the waters. Egeria grants their wish for redemption, ordering them to guard her secret — the entrance to the Primordial Sea — beneath the waves. This results in the construction of the Fortress of Meropide, where the prisoners live and guard the path to the Primordial Sea. However, this secret would eventually become forgotten over time.
Natlan
>1000 years ago ― A historical figure named Tenoch, known for his giant obsidian club, recruited allies from each of the six major tribes of Natlan to defend Natlan against a "turbid black tide."
>1000 years ago ― The Pyro Archon, Murata, held martial arts tournaments between Natlan tribes.
? years ago ― For reasons currently unknown, Vennessa's tribe — the Children of Murata — leave Natlan and wander the plains for many generations, until they run into Ursa the Drake 1010 years ago. (See Vennessa's section)
Golden Apple Archipelago
<2600 years ago ― After Minacious Isle is formed, a group of people gets shipwrecked there, including a grandmother with a family heirloom from her hometown. These people go on to live across the archipelago for at least five generations.
The speakers of Conch Retrospection I: Songs of a Distant Home (Five Mountains, Two Paths, One River, Four Winds, and Clan of Song) span a minimum of four generations starting with the grandchild of the first grandmother (the addressee and speaker, respectively, in Five Mountains), or five when including the first grandmother. It is unknown how many generations are not represented by the Echoing Conches. The tightest plausible timeline is as follows:
Let Person Z be the speaker of Five Mountains. Her grandchild, who she speaks to in Five Mountains, is Person A. Person A is from generation #1.
The speaker of Two Paths could be Person A (generation #1), now grown. She could be referring to herself as "Mommy" in third person, because she may be addressing her child. She speaks to Person B, who would be from generation #2.
The speaker of One River, "Grandma," could be Person B (generation #2), now grown. She speaks to Person C, who would be from generation #4.
The speaker of Four Winds could be Person C (generation #4), still a child.
The "Mother" in Clan of Song is likely not the speaker of One River, as while they both sound elderly, they have different voices. She could be the mother between Person B (generation #2) and Person C (generation #4), which would make her from generation #3. This would also make the other speaker in Clan of Song Person C (generation #4), now grown.
500 years ago ― A pirate crew from a Shogun-ruled Inazuma is separated when their boat splits in half. One group gets shipwrecked on the Nameless Island between Broken Isle and Twinning Isle, while the other group drifts southeast until they end up southeast of Twinning Isle. The pirates lose all of their treasure except for a samurai puppet that they stole, which is later relocated to the Central Platform.
500 years ago ― The pirates and islanders figure out a way to get off the archipelago.
Pre-Cataclysm (>500 years ago)
Mondstadt
>500 years ago ― Arundolyn, Rostam, and Rosalyne-Kruzchka Lohefalter are born.
>500 years ago ― Arundolyn and his childhood friend Rostam grow up together in Mondstadt and eventually both join the Knights of Favonius. Arundolyn becomes the Grand Master known as the "Lion of Light," while Rostam becomes the "Wolf Pup."
Rostam gained the title of Wolf Pup when he was 27 years old. He preferred doing dirty work in the shadows, without restraints of being a knight, so that Arundolyn could remain a model knight. It is said that he continued running the secret society established around 500 years earlier by Kreuzlied.
Rostam taught the Knights of Favonius his sword style, the Favonius Bladework, which continues to be used to this day. Arundolyn's fighting style, which wielded a greatsword in one hand and a longsword in the other, required immense strength that few were able to replicate, and so it soon died out.
>500 years ago ― Rostam and Rosalyne-Kruzchka Lohefalter fall in love.
>500 years ago, just before the cataclysm ― Rosalyne leaves Mondstadt to study at Sumeru Akademiya.
Liyue
Morax signs a contract with an unknown party, agreeing to not disclose whatever is about to happen in the cataclysm.
Among the five Yakshas, only Bosacius and Alatus remained. Before he went insane, Bosacius wished to seal off his treasure and to be done with this world.
After Bosacius went insane and abandoned his post, he was drawn by the conflict of The Chasm and went there to fight.
Ultimately, Alatus (Xiao) became the sole known yaksha left in this world.
Inazuma
Ei and Makoto attended the Mikawa Flower Festival, as did Kitsune Saiguu and Yae Miko.
>530 years ago ― A samurai named Yanagibashi Takuto accidentally stumbles into the Mikawa Flower Festival. 
Mikoshi Nagamasa is adopted into the Mikoshi Clan by the oni Mikoshi Chiyo.
Asase Hibiki moves from the Asase Shrine to the Grand Narukami Shrine to receive training.
Asase Hibiki, Mikoshi Nagamasa, and Kamuna Harunosuke receive training from the Yougou Tengu and thereafter become known as "The Yougou Three." Hibiki learns "true magic" from the Tengu.
Takamine the Mistsplitter challenges the Great Tengu to a duel, which ends in a tie. In exchange for the Tengu's bow, Thundering Pulse, Takamine becomes her servant for several years and resides in the Grand Narukami Shrine. He learns some of their archery and swordsmanship and becomes a renowned swordsman himself. Feeling that his archery skills were going to waste, he teaches Hibiki his techniques.
The kitsune Urakusai writes the original Chronicles of the Six Kitsune.
Urakusai does something that greatly angers the Kitsune Saiguu, leading her to banish him. What he did is no longer clear, but it may relate to the Abyss' invasion of Teyvat during the cataclysm.
After Urakusai's banishment, the Kitsune Saiguu moves from the Grand Narukami Shrine to Tenshukaku in preparation for the Abyss' attack.
Fontaine
While knowing she could not make an enemy of the divine, Egeria did not want harm to befall her followers because of the prophecy. She assigned Focalors, one of her Oceanid followers, to be her successor, hoping that she would be able to concoct a plan to deceive Celestia.
The Fleuvre Cendre, ruled by the outlaw Eduardo Baker, runs afoul of the bureaucracy of the Court of Fontaine; it is raided by the Maison Gardiennage and its leaders arrested. Eduardo is sentenced to exile in the Great Red Sand.
The Siege of Poisson — While being led to exile, Eduardo is freed by his henchmen and flees to Poisson, taking the Maison Gardiennage personnel who had been escorting him as hostages. Poisson is razed in the ensuing battle between Eduardo's faction and the Gardes, resulting in the deaths of many of its residents. The mayor of Poisson, Renault de Petrichor, likely died in the siege.
In the aftermath of the siege, Renault's son, Rene de Petrichor, and Eduardo's son, Jakob Baker, are sent to the Narzissenkreuz Institute, where they befriend Alain Guillotin and Mary-Ann.
Khaenri'ah
>500 years ago ― Dainsleif is born.
The Traveler's sibling arrives in Khaenri'ah.
? years ago ― Pierro is unable to stop the ruler of Khaenri'ah or the sages from "tearing away the veil of sin." This results in Khaenri'ah's destruction at the hands of the Heavenly Principles.
The Cataclysm (500 years ago)
Main article: Cataclysm

Monsters from the Abyss invade the aboveground world of Teyvat, causing widespread devastation.
The people of Teyvat attribute the creation of these monsters to a "great sinner," Gold, also known as Albedo's master and mother Rhinedottir. Her creations, the Alfisol were the advance guard for the monsters from the Abyss
The Kingdom of Khaenri'ah is destroyed by the Heavenly Principles, causing the fall of the Eclipse Dynasty and the entire civilization. Khaenri'ah's destruction causes a devastating ripple effect.
The Seven become involved in Khaenri'ah after the Abyss' invasion of Teyvat.
Aether and Lumine fall to Teyvat while traveling between different worlds after their home world was destroyed. They crash-land and fall unconscious from their "meteorite" impact.
The Traveler's sibling wakes up first and learned more about Teyvat. The sibling witnesses the cataclysm and the Gods destroying Khaenri'ah. They rush back to their impact-point and wake up The Traveler, showing them the destruction that's being wrought in Khaenri'ah.
Due to the Traveler's sibling's journey with Dainsleif taking place after the cataclysm, it is presumed that the sibling here has only briefly explored Teyvat before encountering the cataclysm.
Before meeting the Unknown God, Lumine twines an Inteyvat in her hair.
If Aether is chosen as the Traveler, it is implied Lumine picked the flowers from Khaenri'ah herself. If Lumine is chosen as the Traveler, it is implied Aether gifted them to her after returning from Khaenri'ah to wake her.
The twins attempt to leave immediately, only to be stopped by the Unknown God. The twins battle against the Unknown God in last-resort attempt to leave, spawning wings and custom swords. The twins lose the fight, with the Unknown God trapping the Traveler's sibling first within a cube, and then the Traveler after they attempt to free their sibling. The Traveler falls asleep within the cubes once again for the next 500 years.
Mondstadt
During the cataclysm, The Knights of Favonius, led by the current Grand Master Arundolyn and Rostam, go on an expedition to Khaenri'ah to fight the monsters.
Rostam mentors a man known as the White Knight (possibly "Roland" who loved justice above all else and fought against the monsters of Khaenri'ah. As he fought monsters, he came to be known as the Bloodstained Knight, and people started fearing him. He then ventures deeper into Khaenri'ah and dies battling monsters. In the depths of the world, he learns about the origin of the monsters that destroyed Khaenri'ah and the ultimate injustice that turned the people of Khaenri'ah into monsters, therefore joining the Abyss Order.
An alchemist from Khaenri'ah, "Gold" Rhinedottir, creates one of her masterpieces, Durin. She sends Durin and other creatures she created to the continent of Teyvat to "display [their] beauty." Upon reaching Mondstadt, however, Durin lays waste to the city, although it is suggested that Durin was not conscious of his actions after reaching Teyvat until Dvalin fatally wounded him in their battle.
At that time there was no Lionfang Knight, as Arundolyn, then Grand Master of the Knights of Favonius and Lion of the South, gave up fighting after his friend Rostam died during the expedition to Khaenri'ah. As a result, there was also no one strong enough to take on Durin.
The people's cry for help are heard by the Anemo Archon, who calls upon Dvalin. The two engage Durin in battle and eventually defeat him, but Dvalin ingests Durin's poisonous blood, corrupted by the Abyss' power, in the process. To recuperate, Dvalin takes refuge in Decarabian's Tower in Old Mondstadt and falls into deep slumber.
Durin's corpse falls over on Dragonspine and the power inside Durin's blood seeps into the land, reviving the Frostbearing Tree. Durin's blood appears to coagulate as Scarlet Quartz, due to the high concentrations of the mineral in Wyrmrest Valley, wherein Durin's heart still beats.
Rosalyne-Kruzchka Lohefalter returns to Mondstadt and learns of Rostam's death. In her rage and despair, she uses the art of liquid flame she learned at Sumeru Akademiya to turn her body into that of living flame to avenge him, and becomes known the Crimson Witch of Flames.
Liyue
The Chasm and Dunyu Ruins are two known locations majorly impacted by the cataclysm.
An 'iron meteorite' impacted the Chasm and then monsters poured out of the Chasm and in response, Morax sent the Millelith to defend and evacuate the miners.
An unnamed yaksha — who had once abandoned their duty to defend Liyue — returned to fight alongside the Millelith. The yaksha and Millelith who chose to lead the vanguard ultimately perished in battle.
The monsters' threat was diverted by the combined efforts of the Yaksha — who revealed to be Bosacius, a mortal thaumaturge named Boyang, and the Millelith vanguard. They contrived a stratagem to trap and seal the beasts in the depths of The Chasm by using the Fantastic Compass, a catalyst which had the power to manipulate space. In the critical moments of the fight, Bosacius, Boyang and the Millelith vanguard ultimately sacrificed themselves by sealing themselves along with the beasts because the compass needed constant energy flow from a mortal and an adeptus to operate.
There were very few survivors of the conflict in the Chasm. One such person was Rongzhao, Boyang's brother, but he went insane when returned to his family. Another figure was a Millelith who lost all four limbs when rescuing the miners and fending off the monsters, but later he taught himself to become a famed doctor. He set up the memorial of the fellow Millelith comrades after he received a Vision.
What occurred in Dunyu Ruins is unknown, but its people decided to abandon the city and move to Liyue Harbor; none of the refugees nor adepti have spoken about what happened there.
The emerging abyssal influence was said to be the reason people abandoned Dunyu Ruins, and it became a ruin.
Dunyu Ruins may be the byproduct of the main conflict in the Chasm, due to the fact that Bosacius commanded the Millelith force to hold the line at 60 miles outside The Chasm at all costs, which can mean the nearest location, Dunyu Ruins, was also affected by the Chasm's waves of monsters as well.
Inazuma

Sumeru
500 years ago ― The previous Dendro Archon, Greater Lord Rukkhadevata, disappears during the cataclysm.
The king of the forest Viaghara dies protecting the forests. His successors today are Rishboland Tigers.
Girdle of the Sands
Greater Lord Rukkhadevata travelled to Tunigi Hollow, where abyssal monsters were active. The former Hydro Archon Egeria's remains formed the Amrita Pool. In order to anchor Egeria into the mortal realm, Rukkhadevata grew the Harvisptokhm.
Simurgh finally awakes from its slumber. As destined, Simurgh drank the Amrita, purifying it from the abyss and sacrificed itself. Simurgh's form was shattered into countless Khvarena, the most sentient of which became the Pari.
Fontaine
500 years ago ― Egeria dies and Focalors takes over. Due to differences in ideology between Egeria and Focalors, the Oceanids refuse to obey Focalors and go on self-imposed exiles from Fontaine.
The director of the Narzissenkreuz Institute, Lyris, who was herself an Oceanid, also disappears.
The great beast Elynas appears in Fontaine, spreading severe pollution to the land and sea. Basil Elton, vice-director of the Institute and former Admiral of the Fontaine Navy, comes out of retirement to fight against the threat. The Fontaine Armada set off for what would be their final battle; for 35 days it pursued Elynas, all the while attracting monsters from the Abyss. After finally catching up to the beast, the armada slammed into him, which destroyed the ship and killed all its crew while also mortally wounding Elynas.
Elynas eventually dies from his wounds, but maintains his consciousness.
A massive flood later called the "first diluvian period" (or "first flood period") submerges much of Fontaine, including the Narzissenkreuz Institute. The Institute, now flooded and without a director or vice-director, officially closes; Jakob and Rene are adopted by Karl Ingold, while Alain and Mary-Ann are adopted by Emanuel Guillotin.
At some unknown point, Alain enrolls into the Institute of Natural Philosophy in pursuit of mechanical research.

Khaenri'ah
Dainsleif, known as the "Twilight Sword," is a royal guard of the Eclipse Dynasty. He is unable to protect the people of Khaenri'ah and is cursed with immortality, wandering aimlessly, and forced to watch the people he was meant to protect turn into monsters of the Abyss and hilichurls.
Khaenri'ahns who are of pure-blood descent are deemed as "the greater sinners" and punished with the curse of immortality, while all other citizens (those who are half-blood or hail from other nations entirely) are punished with the "curse of the wilderness."
The Traveler's Sibling witnesses Khaenri'ah's destruction. They return to where the Traveler still lay unconscious from their crash-landing on Teyvat, wake them up, and briefly takes them to Khaenri'ah before attempting to leave this world and move onto another one.
The one-eyed king Irmin grew weak. The Alberich Clan stepped in as regents.
Post-Cataclysm (500–100 years ago)
The amount and activity of hilichurls in Teyvat drastically increases, suggesting some of them may have been Khaenri'ahn denizens who were transformed into hilichurls as punishment for the cataclysm.
<500 years ago — The Traveler's sibling wakes up first (again) after being trapped by the Unknown God.
The sibling spends some time traveling with Dainsleif, until they met Eide (real name Chlothar Alberich) in Sumeru, where he tried to cure his now-turned-to-hilichurl illegitimate son named Caribert.
After witnessing the miracle granted by a strange being (who called itself a "sinner"), Chlothar declares the founding of Abyss Order.
Not long after the founding of Abyss Order, the sibling parts ways with Dainsleif due to "finding the truth about this world."
100 years after Abyss Order was founded, the Traveler's Sibling assumes leadership of the Abyss Order.
After the cataclysm, September 13 — Rhinedottir creates Albedo. He is born after the destruction of Khaenri'ah and has never seen the nation firsthand.
Mondstadt
? years ago ― Before the Crimson Witch of Flame could be fully devoured by her own flames, Pierro of the Fatui Harbingers, finds her and recruits her, giving her a Cryo Delusion to put out her flames. The Crimson Witch of Flame becomes Signora, the 8th of the Fatui Harbingers.
400 years ago ― An ancestor of Ella Musk and Dr. Edith writes "An Investigation into the Cultural Customs of the Wind Kingdom," which is excerpted in Breeze Amidst the Forest.
>300 years ago ― Olaf, a denizen from Springvale, is born.
300 years ago ― Olaf is frozen by a Cryo Regisvine while attempting to hunt a certain breed of boar, prized for its extraordinarily sumptuous taste, that is driven to extinction everywhere except for Dragonspine. According to stories passed down during his time, Springvale was formed around a spring created by melted ice and snow from Dragonspine, so it was established after Sal Vindagnyr froze over.
<200 years ago ― A Lochfolk named Callirhoe, also known as the Spring Fairy, moves to Springvale from Fontaine and blesses the waters. According to Olaf, there were no stories about the Spring Fairy during his time, indicating she probably arrived after his accidental cryopreservation.
Liyue
<500 years ago — In Liyue, the cataclysm created a martial arts renaissance as people sought ways to fight the monsters that continued appearing even after the immediate monster threat ended. Yun Hui of the Yun Family, a clan of blacksmiths, joined forces with master craftsman Han Wu to produce a series of weapon designs now known as the "prototypes."
Following their fathers' footsteps, Yun Huang and Han Ce cooperated to create the Blackcliff Series.
Inazuma
After the cataclysm ― Ei officially takes up the position of Electro Archon after Makoto's death. As she was Makoto's kagemusha and adopted Makoto's titles as her own, most are unaware of the original Archon's death.
Disillusioned with Celestia after witnessing the events at Khaenri'ah, and in her grief on the losses she sustained over the course of the cataclysm, Ei decides to attain "eternity" by creating a puppet in her likeness. She first experiments with the technology and creates her first prototype, which takes the form of a young male vessel. After seeing him shed tears after his creation, Ei decides he is too delicate to handle the Gnosis and instead seals his powers and leaves him to live his own life. Now armed with the knowledge of how to create puppets, she makes several other failed products before abandoning her quest to create a new vessel to house the Gnosis entirely.
Ei establishes the Tri-Commission, composed of the Tenryou Commission, the Kanjou Commission, and the Yashiro Commission, which oversee all matters in Inazuma.
Hiiragi Hiroshi of the Kanjou Commission built the prosperous Ritou port.
Alice visits Inazuma, where she meets the young girl in charge of the Grand Narukami Shrine, Yae Miko.
The Yougou Three part ways, never to reunite:
Asase Hibiki returns to the Asase Shrine on Seirai Island. She eventually becomes involved in Ako Domeki's rebellion against the Inazuma Shogunate (continue reading below for details).
Kamuna Harunosuke leaves for Liyue to pursue the "more powerful 'way of the adepti.'"
Mikoshi Nagamasa, to restore the name of the Mikoshi Clan after Mikoshi Chiyo turned her blade on Ei, joins the Shogunate and becomes an Inspector at Tatarasuna.
Mikoshi Michihiro, Chiyo's biological son, goes into seclusion in the forests near Konda Village out of shame over his mother's actions.
The Great Tengu, enraged at her own inability to protect the Kitsune Saiguu, departs from the mortal realm and leaves behind her daughter, Teruyo.
? years ago ― Michihiro meets Teruyo when she finds him in the forest. She bestows him with the name "Iwakura," and he is thereafter known as "Iwakura Michihiro."
13 years later ― During their tenth duel, Michihiro finally catches Teruyo. Teruyo gives him the title "Tengu Victor" and decides to disappear from his life to focus on her responsibilities to her clan.
? years ago ― Takamine the Mistsplitter somehow emerges from the Abyss after disappearing from Teyvat for many years. He encounters Asase Hibiki, whom he still recognizes, but she immediately kills him.
? years ago ― The pirate Ako Domeki Zaemon of Seirai Island leads a rebellion against the Shogunate. Hibiki, who is reminded of Takamine when she sees him, decides to assist his cause and later uses the magic she learned from the Tengu to release the seals over Seirai Island. This releases the lingering hatred of the Thunderbird, whose power — manifesting as a massive Electro storm at the center of the island — fragmented Seirai island and swept both the Shogunate and Ako Domeki's ships far from the island.
The Shogunate evacuates the people of Seirai Island and moves them to Narukami Island. Although the area immediately surrounding Asase Shrine is unaffected by the Thunderbird's hatred, the shrine is left abandoned save for Neko and the other cats residing there.
Iwakura Michihiro develops the Iwakura Art sword style and becomes the sword instructor for the Kujou Clan, receiving the title "Douin."
After Michihiro develops the Tengu Sweeper techniques, a series of Maguu Kenki puppets modeled after his fighting style and memories are created.
? years ago, after the creation of Maguu Kenki ― Ako Domeki defeats a Maguu Kenki doll and steals it for himself. The ship carrying it, however, somehow gets lost and becomes shipwrecked on the Golden Apple Archipelago. While the sailors eventually manage to escape the archipelago alongside the original islanders, the puppet is left behind.
? years ago ― Ioroi, having been tricked by the Kitsune Saiguu into staying away from the conflicts of the cataclysm, believes her to still be playing hide-and-seek. Unable to get her to show herself, however, he begins breaking the kitsune statues around Narukami Island and in one, finds an important-looking comb and steals it. The Shogunate learns of Ioroi's antics and dispatches Harunosuke, who had returned to Inazuma, to deal with Ioroi. Harunosuke seals Ioroi and many of the bake-danuki into stone statues.
Sometime later, Harunosuke performs a Minor Cleansing with the help of Hanachirusato.
~400 years ago ― Ei ultimately creates a puppet known simply as "the Shogun," intended to rule Inazuma based on the guidelines for "eternity" she had set. After giving the Shogun the relevant information about herself, Ei discards her physical form to enter the Plane of Euthymia, in which she will meditate for all eternity to stave off erosion. Before entering the Plane of Euthymia, she gives her Gnosis to Yae Miko.
~400 years ago ― Ei's first prototype puppet awakens in Shakkei Pavilion, having no name for himself and only a feather as proof of his connection to the Raiden Shogun. He is found by Mikoshi Nagamasa's yoriki, Katsuragi, and joins the group consisting of Armory Officer Niwa Hisahide, Inspector Mikoshi Nagamasa, Katsuragi, Kinjiro, Nozomu, and Vice Armory Officer Miyazaki in Tatarasuna. Others in the group refer to him as the "Kabukimono" (Japanese: 傾奇者 meaning "wandering eccentric").
The Kabukimono is well received by the people of Tatarasuna, teaching him various skills, including forging swords. He becomes good friends with the people of Tatarasuna.
Nagamasa forges his crowning achievement, the Daitatara Nagamasa. In their joy, Nozomu makes a painting of the nagamaki while Katsuragi and Kabukimono perform a sword dance.
A Fontaine mechanic, Escher, comes to Tatarasuna to collaborate. He implements some technologies to the Mikage Furnace, but this ended up releasing dangerous Tataragami and poisoning the people of Tatarasuna, and caused the Mikage Furnace to spew lethal doses of Tatarigami.
Niwa sends people to Inazuma City for aid from the Shogunate, but none of them returns. Then Kabukimono is sent to Inazuma City for aid, but is rejected by the Shogunate because earlier in the same year, Ei's Shogun has activated and she has entered the Plane of Euthymia. Then Kabukimono asks for help to Yae Miko, who does send aid to Tatarasuna, but they were all shipwrecked. Kabukimono is unaware of this, and considered that the Shogunate had abandoned Tatarasuna.
Meanwhile, Niwa confronts Escher, who then murders Niwa and reveals himself to be Il Dottore. He then, as Escher, lies to the people of Tatarasuna, claiming that Niwa fled Tatarasuna. When Kabukimono returns empty-handed, Escher told him that he has been tasked to disable the furnace, giving him a device to help absorb the miasma. After Kabukimono successfully disables the furnace, Escher reveals that inside the device was "a heart that Niwa took from the chest of one of his men," but in truth, Dottore had taken Niwa's heart and placed it into the device. Kabukimono, horrified of this, grows disdain for Niwa and humans, and leaves Tatarasuna.
With Niwa's disappearance, Nagamasa, the second-in-command, becomes responsible of the events in Tatarasuna. Katsuragi is willing to face capital punishment in place of his master, and thus Nagamasa cleaves Katsuragi with the Daitatara Nagamasa before throwing the blade into the furnace.
Nozomu throws himself into the furnace to save the blade but later dies from the wounds he sustained; Kinjiro afterwards hides the remains of the blade as well as Nozumu's painting in the Arsenal. Both Nagamasa himself and the Daitatara Nagamasa are thereon known as the Katsuragikiri Nagamasa (Katsuragi-Slashing Nagamasa).
After Kabukimono leaves Tatarasuna, he encountered a sickly child who is affected by the Tatarigami, his parents, likely workers of Tatarasuna, died of the same cause. Kabukimono and the child makes a promise to stay together forever. But the child dies young due to the Tatarigami. Kabukimono enraged by this, burned the child's house down. His hatred towards gods and humans grows further.
After the events above, during his wanderings in Inazuma, Kabukimono names himself Kunikuzushi (Japanese: 国崩 lit. "Country Destroyer").
As a result of Scaramouche removing all information about himself from the Irminsul in Inversion of Genesis, various aspects of the Tatarasuna incident and the fall of the Raiden Gokaden are vastly altered. All instances of Kabukimono or Kunikuzushi are entirely removed from history, and is replaced by entirely new characters. Dottore still caused the incident, but there is a "brave swordsmith" of the Hyakume Clan who rushed to the scene. He and Niwa both sacrificed themselves to disable the furnace, but neither of them survived.
At some point, the Sacred Sakura takes on the shape of a kitsune head as a result of the kitsune's care for the Sacred Sakura.
Sumeru
<500 years ago, October 27 ― Following the cataclysm, Lesser Lord Kusanali is born and rises to the position of Dendro Archon to replace Greater Lord Rukkhadevata, who disappeared during the chaos.
Following the events of Akasha Pulses, the Kalpa Flame Rises when the memories of Greater Lord Rukkhadevata were erased from Teyvat, Lesser Lord Kusanali is believed by all, including herself, to have always been the original Dendro Archon, and that she lost all of her memories and knowledge during the cataclysm, resulting in her imprisonment by the sages.
>400 years ago ― The Temple of Silence, an organization hailing from the desert that were responsible for knowledge from the era of King Deshret, departs the rainforest due to the corruption of the sages back to the desert, and settle into a large underground temple in Thamud Oasis.
Upon their departure, the Akademiya, seeking to cover up their departure, creates a front organization that is responsible for the custody and disposal of information and documents not fit for public dissemination.
200 years ago ― The most talented scholar of Sumeru Akademiya (before Lisa) graduates.
>120 years ago, August 20 ― Faruzan is born.
>100 years ago ― Faruzan is trapped within ruins related to King Deshret's civilization and was unable to escape until a century later.
Fontaine
~499 years before the Archon Quest The Opera of Noirceur and Blancheur in Chapter IV: Act V - Masquerade of the Guilty ― Focalors avulses her divinity from her body and spirit, leaving behind Furina as her ''humanity''. Furina was then instructed by Focalors to publicly take the mantle of the Hydro Archon as a measure towards saving Fontaine from the prophecy.
Focalors then creates and proceeds to seclude herself in the Oratrice Mecanique d'Analyse Cardinale, acting as the Oratrice's verdict-giving system. Continual trials to be held in the Opera Epiclese would allow Indemnitium—a form of power derived from people's belief—to be accumulated in the Oratrice, of which Focalors would allot a small amount to power Fontaine. The majority of the remaining power was to be stored and utilized when the people of Fontaine would hold the trial of the Hydro Archon, as stated in the prophecy.
~499 years later, the Oratrice sentences the Hydro Archon to death. Focalors bears the punishment, and has willingly given up her full authority as the Hydro Archon to the Hydro Dragon Sovereign, thus clears the people of Fontaine from their 'Original Sin', and making them - including Furina - fully human. As the result, the Hydro Archon's divine throne is destroyed - hence there will be no further Hydro Archons and the Oratrice is no longer functional - and the people of Fontaine can no longer be dissolved by the Primordial Sea water.
Due to the extreme exhaustion and stress she endured for the last 499 years, Furina leaves the Palais Mermonia and Opera Epiclese, where she settles down in an apartment.
? years ago
Karl, Rene, and Jakob explore the Khaenri'ahn ruins in Vourukasha Oasis and Madinat al-Nuhas, guided by the Order of Skeptics. During the trip, Jakob's weak constitution caused his health to deteriorate. Unbeknownst to Karl, Rene went behind his back and used Abyssal power to save Jakob. During this trip, they also deduce the "world-formula" from the records they found in the ruins, predicting a second flood period which would destroy Fontaine in the next few centuries.
Jakob and Rene return to Fontaine and soon discover Elynas' remains. They begin conducting secret experiments on the remains, namely by having Jakob absorb Elynas' blood. After some time, he became able to survive without eating by subsisting mainly on Elynas' flesh.
During their research into Elynas, Jakob and Rene bump into their childhood friends Alain and Mary-Ann. They are accepted into the Institute of Natural Philosophy following Alain's recommendation.
Rene begins recruiting researchers from the Institute of Natural Philosophy into a secret society he has named the Narzissenkreuz Ordo, created to help Fontaine survive the coming apocalypse that he and Jakob had predicted.
Jakob and Rene conduct a failed experiment to try to save the life of Carter Scherbius, Alain's sickly research assistant who the two had grown close to. However, the experiment goes horribly wrong and Carter is left in a semi-conscious state with the tissues of his body destroyed, leading Alain to cut off ties with them.
Some time after the split, the Guillotin siblings become members of the Marechaussee Phantom. Alain creates a mechanical assistant prototype and names it Seymour, tasking to always accompany and protect Mary-Ann.
Lyris returns to Fontaine, although she spends her days alone in the remains of the Narzissenkreuz Institute longing for the past. Rene and Jakob eventually find her and convince her to join the Ordo.
Rene decides to become "the first subject" of his radical experimentation and have his personality removed, using the Holy Blade of Narzissenkreuz alongside Lyris' purified essence to dissolve himself into a pure base personality for the gestalt. However, the ritual was a failure, and Rene is almost dissolved completely into the pure waters, only partially saved by Jakob through some unspecified method.
Jakob takes over as the de-facto leader of the Ordo. During this time, the construction of the Tower of Ipsissimus, the Ordo's base of operations, is finally completed.
Jakob eventually creates a Hydro Tulpa to store Rene's disembodied consciousness, using Lyris’ essence, Alain's pocketwatch and Carter's corrupted remains as the basis for his body. He names the new body "Narzissenkreuz," and the newly reborn Rene returns to leadership at the Ordo.
Narzissenkreuz then uses what remained of Carter's body to create Caterpillar, a hilichurl endowed with sentience. He also teaches Caterpillar human speech.
Emanuel Guillotin is assigned to investigate the Ordo. However, he, along with the Champion Duelist Marfisa, are ambushed and absorbed by Narzissenkreuz. From absorbing their memories, Narzissenkreuz learns that the Court of Fontaine is hot on the Ordo's trail.
~400 years ago — Narzissenkreuz orders Jakob, Caterpillar, and Lyris to enter Elynas' remains, a ploy to draw the attention of the Marechaussee Hunters away from himself. Mary-Ann and Seymour are among those sent to Elynas to arrest the Ordo members.
During the battle, someone triggers an explosion which causes multiple human casualties and damage to Elynas' remains. Mary-Ann is fatally wounded and, for reasons unknown, has her personality absorbed by Lyris. Seymour is also heavily damaged. Jakob, however, survives the incident.
The Melusines are born from the wounds in Elynas' remains, caused by the shrapnel of destroyed clockwork meka flying through the air from the explosion and piercing through its body.
Narzissenkreuz falls into the Primordial Sea hidden beneath the Tower of Ipsissimus.
Caterpillar is found guilty of being an accessory to Narzissenkreuz's schemes and imprisoned in the Fortress of Meropide.
~400 years ago — Neuvillette is instated as the Iudex or Chief Justice of the Court of Fontaine.
The newly appointed Chief Justice of Fontaine brings the Melusines from Elynas into the rest of Fontaine for the first time. However, Fontanians were hesitant to accept Melusines into their society, believing them to be creatures of calamity due to an increase in "strange incidents," coupled with Neuvillette having just been appointed as the Iudex.
Carole is one of the first Melusines to live among humans in Fontaine. She worked alongside the then-leader of the Special Security and Surveillance Patrol, Vautrin, in order to foster goodwill and cooperation between the two species, in spite of the distrust towards the Melusines at the time.
5 years later, Neuvillette awarded Carole and Vautrin with the Medal of Peace for their hard work in developing the relationship between Fontainians and the Melusines. However, not long after, a group of hardliners opposed to Neuvillette, including Thibert and Suavegothe, committed a murder and successfully lured Carole to the crime scene. They then framed her for the murder and incited a crowd of people into ordering her detention, resulting in chaos between the Gardes and the mob. As a result, Carole committed suicide to pacify the situation. Vautrin subsequently became enraged by her needless self-sacrifice and sought revenge on the hardliners, killing them to exact his own form of justice. Neuvillette was likewise upset at the turn of events.
After being exiled to the Fortress of Meropide, Vautrin became a model prisoner and established the Mutual Aid Society, which used a design similar to Vautrin's Medal of Peace as their badge for the next 400 years.
400 years later, the Melusine Kiara would have a similar incident where someone threatened her, prompting Neuvillette to personally investigate to ensure an incident would not happen again. Kiara, who was kept inside the Palais Mermonia for her own safety, had a dream where she encountered Carole, who remarked that she was delighted to see the Melusines' dreams of living peacefully with humans come to fruition.
The Melusine Sigewinne, wanting to save a human friend, accepts a potion from her teacher to give her a more human-like appearance, with more natural skin and human hands. However, she ends up breaking an ancient Fontanian law regarding turning other species into human, resulting in her being sent to the Fortress of Meropide to serve out her sentence. She chooses to stay after her sentence is lifted to help the inmates with medical needs.
? years ago — Alain leaves the Marechaussee Phantom and establishes the Fontaine Research Institute of Kinetic Energy Engineering.
Snezhnaya
The Tsaritsa cuts all ties with Barbatos following the Cataclysm.
? years ago — Pierro becomes the first of the Eleven Fatui Harbingers.
Khaenri'ah
At some point after the cataclysm, the Traveler's sibling wakes up and travels the world of Teyvat with Dainsleif.
? years ago ― Sometime after the events depicted in Archon Quest Chapter III: Act VI - Caribert, the Abyss Order is founded by Chlothar Alberich with the intent of taking revenge on Celestia and The Seven.
? years ago ― Near the end of their journey, the Traveler's sibling realizes the "truth of this world" and parts ways with Dainsleif. Eventually, the Traveler's sibling aligns themselves with the Abyss Order and declares Dainsleif to be their enemy.
? years ago ― After Chlothar is driven fully insane by the effects of the curse of immortality, he disappears and is presumed to have died within the realm of the Avidya Forest after finally finding a way to break the curse. The Abyss Order continues operation, now under the control of the Traveler's sibling.
~10 years ago ― Kaeya's father takes him from Khaenri'ah to Mondstadt and abandons him near Dawn Winery, calling him their "last hope."
Recent Past (<100 years ago)

Note: The bullets below are arranged in order of relative reverse chronological order, estimated based on characters' apparent ages.

Mondstadt
? years ago ― One of the statues of the seven in Mondstadt goes missing over night having been stolen by the Abyss Order for their Loom of Fate operation.
50–40 years ago ― Amber's grandfather, a renowned mercenary leader from Liyue, falls victim to a disastrous monster attack that leaves him the sole survivor. After being saved by a doctor from the Knights of Favonius, he decides to move to Mondstadt and become a member himself. There, he established the Outriders, a division of archer scouts whose members he personally trained. He also starts a family there.
~50 Years Ago ― Callirhoe, also known as the Spring Fairy, strikes up a friendship with Old Finch when he is a child. Their story becomes the basis for the book, Heart of Clear Springs.
? years ago ― The famous adventurer Seamus Pegg decides to settle down in Mondstadt, joining the Church of Favonius and eventually rising to the position of Cardinal of Daybreak. He also falls in love with Frederica Gunnhildr of the Gunnhildr Clan.
~25–15 years ago ― Seamus and Frederica have two daughters together, Jean and Barbara. Some years later, the two lovers have a falling out and separate; Jean stays with Frederica, while Barbara goes with Seamus.
12 years ago ― Diluc receives his Vision at age 10.
>10 years 6 months ago, end of summer ― Kaeya is abandoned by his biological father near the Dawn Winery as part of an "ancient plot," presumably to save Khaenri'ah. Crepus finds him and takes him in, raising him alongside Diluc.
10 years ago ― Frederica prepares strict training regimens for Jean, which continues to influence her habits long after she became a member of the Knights of Favonius.
8 years ago ― Diluc becomes the Cavalry Captain of the Knights of Favonius at 14 years old, making him the youngest-ever holder of any captaincy within the Order.
Jean is conferred the title of Dandelion Knight at 15 years old.
On the night of Diona's seventh birthday, she is blessed by the Spring Fairy of Springvale with the ability to make delectable beverages, no matter the ingredients.
April 30, 4 years ago ― On Diluc's 18th birthday, Crepus Ragnvindr dies after using a Delusion to protect his and Diluc's caravan from Ursa the Drake, which was lured to them by the Fatui using metal bugs that emit the aroma of Mist Grass. Afterwards, Eroch, an inspector within the Knights of Favonius, orders that the cause of Crepus' death be covered up to maintain the Knights of Favonius' dignity, attributing Ursa's retreat to Diluc while labeling Crepus as a victim of the monster attack. In a fit of rage, Diluc resigns from the Knights of Favonius and abandons his Vision to investigate the truth behind Delusions for himself.
Details on Crepus' death are left ambiguous in-universe: Diluc's character stories and one of Kaeya's character stories say the power of the Delusion backfired and killed Crepus, but according to Kaeya's Vision story and his description of Diluc in the manga, Diluc personally killed Crepus to spare him the suffering caused when the Delusion backfired. The manga's flashback is ambiguous and can favor either interpretation.
On the night of Crepus' death, Kaeya reveals the truth about his origins and purpose to Diluc. In the ensuing fight, Kaeya gains his Vision.
Shortly after Crepus' death, the Fatui use the metal bugs again to lure out Ursa the Drake so Il Dottore can slay it, forcing Mondstadt to be indebted to the Fatui and giving them leverage in the city's affairs.
Diluc journeys across Teyvat to seek the truth behind the Delusions. He discovers that the Fatui are behind them and, in the process of finding out more, lays waste to countless Fatui strongholds. Unable to ignore this threat, the Eleven Fatui Harbingers set up a trap for him and nearly kill him, but he narrowly escapes due to a "third-party observer from the north." This observer is part of an underground network which Diluc joins.
4 years ago, after Crepus' death ― Amber's grandfather abruptly resigns from the Knights of Favonius and disappears, leading to rumors that he had defected. Amber joined the Outriders as a trainee shortly before this, and watches as the division crumbles in the absence of its leader. Determined to live up to her grandfather's reputation and uncover the mystery behind his disappearance, Amber gains a Vision shortly after becoming an official Outrider.
At some point after leaving Mondstadt, a man matching his description returns to Qingce Village some 40–50 years after he last visited the village.
Eroch is found to be a traitor and is purged from the Knights of Favonius along with his co-conspirators, while Jean is promoted from Captain to Master of Knights. Rooting out Eroch's allies while thwarting the plots of the Abyss Order grants Jean her Vision.
After two years of study at Sumeru Akademiya, Lisa graduates. Disillusioned with the atmosphere there, she returns to Mondstadt and joins the Knights of Favonius. Grand Master Varka sought to promote her to Captain of the 8th Company immediately, but this notion was opposed by its Field Officer, Nymph. After a field test, Lisa decides to take the position of Librarian instead so she wouldn't have the responsibilities of captaincy.
May 28,? years ago ― Fischl gains her Vision the moment her 14th birthday is over. Shortly afterwards, she becomes an investigator at the Adventurers' Guild despite her young age thanks to her Vision and her parents' influence.
Razor meets Varka, the current Knight of Boreas, when the man visits Wolvendom one day. Varka gives him his name and teaches him how to use claymores, but embarks on his expedition before ever giving Razor his own name. At some point, he also gains an Electro Vision while attempting to save his lupical from an Abyss Mage. Several months or years later, he comes across Lisa, who decides to become his teacher.
~3.5 years ago ― The Knight of Favonius drafts a plan for an expedition set to depart three years later. Several positions are open for recruiting, such as the Front-Line Surveyor.
~2.5 years ago ― Mika signs up for the Front-Line Surveyor position and officially joins the Knights of Favonius.
3 years ago ― Klee is entrusted to Albedo and the Knights of Favonius by her parents.
~3 years ago ― Rhinedottir and Albedo discover an artifact called The Heart of Naberius within the heart of a dungeon in an unknown region. Shortly thereafter, Rhinedottir disappears, leaving Albedo only a note instructing him to uncover the "truth and meaning of this world," a recommendation letter to give to her friend Alice, and a part of the classical text Opus Magnum. After finding Alice, Albedo is sent to the Knights of Favonius, who could supply him with a laboratory with which to conduct his research. There, his prowess in the Art of Khemia, a yet-unseen art in Mondstadt, lands him the position of Chief Alchemist.
6 months ago ― Grand Master Varka takes the elites of the Knights of Favonius, as well as the cavalry, with him on an expedition away from Mondstadt, appointing Jean as Acting Grand Master in his absence. Seamus Pegg, Frederica Gunnhildr, Mika, and Godwin are among those who went with him, though Godwin was left behind when he took the time to look for Glory's good-luck charm that he misplaced.
After Varka's departure, Diluc returns to Mondstadt, taking over as head of the Dawn Winery that he had entrusted to Adelinde and Elzer and taking up his Vision once more. Around this same time, a mysterious entity who becomes known as the "Darknight Hero" appears, prowling Mondstadt at night and fending off threats to the city. Unbeknownst to most people, this hero is Diluc himself.
A thief steals an artifact from a certain eastern temple in Mondstadt, a vial supposedly containing Barbatos' breath. After word got out, counterfeits have flooded the black market and since then, Diluc and the Fatui have been in a purchasing war in their attempts to each secure the genuine artifact.
Last Ludi Harpastum (~1 year to 6 months ago) ― The events of the manga's main story occur.
The Fatui, led by Il Dottore, attempt to take of Ludi Harpastum to recruit more test subjects, but are thwarted in their initial attempt by Diluc and Kaeya's plan, and Dottore loses interest in the city. As some Fatui diplomats are about to leave on Dottore's orders, they run afoul of Collei, who needed a distraction to slip into the city. She uses the power of her Archon Residue to create a serpent of black fire that kills the diplomats, and the Knights of Favonius are obligated to investigate the situation to maintain relations with the Fatui.
Collei, seeking information about Barnabas to exact her revenge, runs into Amber, then Jean and Lisa. They give her permission to enter the library as they continue investigating the Black Fire Incident, and discover that the power that slew the diplomats is similar in nature to the Delusion (Evil Eye) used by Crepus several years earlier. Amber, who had encountered Dottore as he departed from Mondstadt, grows suspicious after noticing that both he and the Delusion smelled of Mist Pollen. She decides to try and track him down, and manages to find a Fatui device inside a hilichurl camp. However, she is then attacked by Krupp, a former Fatui researcher whom Dottore transformed into a Ruin Hunter. Together with Jean, who went to reinforce her, they take down Krupp for good and return to Mondstadt with evidence against the Fatui.
Realizing that the Fatui are hoping to instigate a swarm of monster attacks during the festival so they can take the credit for defeating them and saving Mondstadt, the Knights of Favonius decide to track down the Fatui devices and destroy them. In the meantime, Lisa contacts her teacher at Sumeru Akademiya to see if anyone would be able to seal Collei's Archon Residue. Amber takes advantage of the situation to let Collei experience Ludi Harpastum's festivities, but their fun is interrupted by Kaeya, who lures Collei away and attacks her to draw out her powers, confirming that she was behind the Black Fire Incident. Upon realizing that Collei herself is innocent, and Amber's interruption allowing her to get away, Kaeya decides to enlist Diluc's help in creating an alibi for the girl.
Barnabas, who came to deal with the Black Fire Incident in Dottore's stead, confronts Kaeya about Collei, having witnessed Amber help her escape. Kaeya pretends to help, with Diluc posing as the perpetrator behind the incident to Barnabas' guards. However, Barnabas himself notices the archon power emitted when Cyno — who was sent from Sumeru Akademiya in response to Lisa's message — seals away Collei's Archon Residue. He confronts and attacks Collei and Amber after Cyno leaves to report to Lisa, but is eventually thwarted by Amber and Diluc's efforts.
Kaeya "traps" Diluc after Barnabas' defeat, allowing the Fatui guards to arrest him and take him away, thereby absolving the Knights of Favonius from any responsibility. Shortly thereafter, Diluc breaks out, leaving behind his mask and Delusion for an uninterested Dottore. The Harbinger also grows irritated by Barnabas' failure and has his guards get rid of him.
In the manga, Kaeya returns Diluc's Vision after he breaks out of prison, hiding it inside the Strange Vase that can be seen inside the Dawn Winery in-game.
Liyue
50–40 years ago — Amber's grandfather, a renowned mercenary leader from Liyue, falls victim to a disastrous monster attack that leaves him the sole survivor. After being saved by a doctor from the Knights of Favonius, he decides to move to Mondstadt and become a member himself. There, he established the Outriders, a division of archer scouts whose members he personally trained. He also starts a family there.
Amber's grandfather is implied to be the adventurer whom Granny Ruoxin fell in love with and promised to live with at Qingce Village, who embarked on an expedition only to disappear. The Qingce Village Bulletin Board contains a message about an unnamed former villager who went to Mondstadt to become a knight, who has recently (as of the present day) returned only to "skulk about," though his manner of using a wind glider is apparently unmistakable.
~40–20 years ago — Big G has an accident and passes away. The village at Wuwang hill suffers (another) disaster, and all the village's inhabitants (including Little Wu, Meng, Mumu, and Congzi) abandon their hometown, heading to Liyue Harbor.
30 years ago — The last time that Cloud Retainer took on her human form before moving to Liyue Harbor.
20 years ago — The last time the Mingxiao Lantern of the Lantern Rite Festival was as big as it is in present day.
? years ago — The Wangshu Inn is constructed at Dihua Marsh by the Liyue Qixing, operated by Verr Goldet and Huai'an, in order to provide covert support for Xiao.
Hu Tao's grandfather, the 75th director, dies when she is 13. She takes over Wangsheng Funeral Parlor as the 77th director. Her grandfather's funeral is the first funeral she oversees. She receives her Vision after her visit to Wuwang Hill to see if he has moved on to the afterlife peacefully.
4 years ago, after Crepus' death — Amber's grandfather abruptly resigns from the Knights of Favonius and disappears, leading to rumors that he had defected.
At some point after leaving Mondstadt, a man matching his description returns to Qingce Village some 40–50 years after he last visited the village.
Qiqi, still trapped in amber after hundreds of years, is discovered and taken to the Wangsheng Funeral Parlor for burial. However, she is still alive thanks to the adeptal energy bestowed upon her and, with the seal having worn off over hundreds of years, manages to escape in the middle of the night. She stumbles upon Baizhu, who decides to employ her at Bubu Pharmacy due to her unique nature.
>2 years ago — The Chasm is sealed off due to numerous reasons: mysterious accidents, miners dug up a strange, harmful "Wish Granter", and strange earthquakes. The decision was made despite the Chasm's wealth and quite surprisingly.
The Liyue Qixing set up a seal called the Seven-Star Array to seal off the underground mine. The vital points (and weak points) of the seal lied on the set of Bedrock Keys around the seal.
For over 2 years, the phenomenon call the Cage-Shaped Geo Formation began to erect from the bedrock of the Chasm. They have been absorbing Geo elemental energy from the surroundings, slowly eroding the structure of the Bedrock Keys.
The Chasm actually was never closed off entirely, professional miners were still working here in case of emergencies. Treasure Hoarders also infiltrated the mine and did illegal mining.
Shortly after the closing, La Signora signed some mutual trade agreements with the Liyue Qixing to explore the Chasm. The Fatui would send an advance team to investigate and eradicate the abnormalities in the underground mines, and both Snezhnaya and Liyue would share the result.
1 year ago — Dongsheng commits tax evasion by intentionally failing to declare some furniture he had made at Fanmu's Carpenters.
Shortly before the events of the Liyue Archon Quests — Tartaglia and Javert collect an outstanding debt held by the owner of Yanshang Teahouse, obtaining the Sigil of Permission in his possession. Childe also exposes the previous owner's fraud, landing him in jail.
After the events of the Liyue Archon Quests — Yelan, an intelligence agent operating under Ningguang, takes over the teahouse as its new owner, where she uses the location as a front for her operations.
Inazuma
~100 years ago ― To enact his revenge against the "bladesmith," Kunikuzushi masterminds the fall of the Raiden Gokaden, eradicating three of the five schools before losing interest in and abandoning his project. His revenge involved instigating a famous swordsmith, Akame Kanenaga, to betray Inazuma; because swordsmithing and the Raiden Gokaden are viewed as a cultural institution, they were under the jurisdiction of the Yashiro Commission. As a result, their inability to prevent the situation dealt a large blow to the Kamisato Clan.
Yae Miko, predicting that the Kamisato Clan would play a major role in Inazuma's future events, intervened in the Kamisato Clan's judgement before the Raiden Shogun and spared them from punishment.
The Kaedehara Clan's head at that time, Kaedehara Yoshinori, stops doing the smithing due to the fearful of Scaramouche's claim. His son Hisamichi attempts to revive the Isshin Art, but to no avail. Eventually, the Kaedehara Clan's fortune keeps regressing, and when Yoshinori's great-grandson, Kazuha, becomes the head, the clan has collapsed.
As a result of Scaramouche removing all information about himself from the Irminsul in Inversion of Genesis, various aspects of the Tatarasuna incident and the fall of the Raiden Gokaden are vastly altered. All instances of Kabukimono or Kunikuzushi are entirely removed from history, and is replaced by entirely new characters. From Kunikuzushi being the one who masterminds the fall of the Raiden Gokaden, instead, a descendant of the "brave swordsmith" of the Hyakume clan is the one who masterminds it. When the descendant got to the Kamisato and Kaedehara clans, they retaliated, and killed the descendant.
30 years ago ― Tejima arrives in Konda Village and settles there, using his vision to protect the villagers from both internal and external threats.
10 years ago ― Thoma gains his Vision when, after being advised by Kamisato Ayato to leave on account of the Yashiro Commission's succession crisis, he nonetheless chooses to continue serving the Kamisato Clan.
1 year ago ― With the Fatui pulling the strings and manipulating the Tenryou Commission and Kanjou Commission, the Shogun suddenly institutes the Sakoku Decree to shut Inazuma's borders and the Vision Hunt Decree — an order to seize all Visions within its borders. Furthermore, since then, no new Electro Visions are known to have appeared, though preexisting Visions can still be used. While Ei is aware that the Fatui are behind this, she does not deem them a threat towards Eternity and does not intervene.
The construction of the Statue of the Omnipresent God begins.
The Sangonomiya Resistance is formed to resist the Vision Hunt Decree. Since then, the Shogunate Army and the Sangonomiya Resistance have been at war, which has halted to a stalemate.
An individual protested against the Vision Hunt Decree by declaring a duel before the throne. However, he lost to Kujou Sara and was promptly executed by the Shogun, but not before his Vision was seized by Kaedehara Kazuha who flees Inazuma after being branded a criminal.
The wards which suppressed Orobashi were destroyed by Orobashi fanatics with the help of Nathan, a Fatui agent who infiltrated the Watatsumi Army. This led to the Tatarigami spreading again.
During the heat of the civil war, the Mikage Furnace began to malfunction, forcing Xavier to erect a safety dome to contain the Tatarigami. Production at Tatarasuna comes to a halt, and the evacuation order for the armory was issued.
Chiori, a aspiring seamstress, departs Inazuma for Fontaine in a hurry.
Sumeru
20 years ago ― Kaveh's Father, a scholar from the Rtawahist and an employee of the Akademiya, enters the Interdarshan Championship to win the Diadem of Knowledge for his son. Sometime after entering the championship, he encounters Sachin and is influenced by his words, soon after returning home to tell his family that he is going into the desert and venturing out to Aaru Village, where supports the villagers financially and medically. He eventually comes across a caravan stuck in quicksand and dies saving them, with his family learning of his death soon after.
Kaveh reached schooling age and enrolled into the Kshahrewar after passing the entrance exams.
? years ago ― A certain youth attends Sumeru Akademiya, hoping to further his research on creating "enhanced humans" despite rejection from his peers and teachers. Pierro tracks him down while following rumors about heresy and recruits him into the Fatui as the Harbinger Il Dottore.
? years ago, May 8 ― Collei is born in Sumeru with the disease of Eleazar and is given to a seer named Barnabas for treatment. Unbeknownst to her parents, however, Barnabas is an agent of the Fatui and turns Collei into a test subject for their Archon Residue experiments.
? years ago ― Lisa graduates from the Spantamad Darshan after only two years of study. Disillusioned with the Akademiya's atmosphere, she returns to Mondstadt and joins the Knights of Favonius.
? years ago ― 100 years after she trapped within the desert ruins, Faruzan finally escapes, and found in a Sumeru forest with a Vision in hand.
? years ago ― Cyno studies under the same master as Lisa.
? years ago ― Faranak leaves for Fontaine for employment. Kaveh met Alhaitham, and they became friends.
Kaveh and Alhaitham begin the joint project "Decoding the Runes and Architectural Philosophy of the Ruins of King Deshret's Civilization," and their respective contributions contributed greatly to academic research and developments in language and architecture.
Kaveh and Alhaitham have a falling outand their friendship comes to an end. They clash in academic journals for some time after this, criticizing each other's perspective. Their collaborative project also comes to a halt due to a lack of a shared vision between the collaborators.
? years ago ― The Six Sages become more radical in their belief that the arts are meaningless, and society follows suit, resulting in the marginalization of people that worked in art-related fields in Sumeru.
<4 years ago ― The following events presumably occur sometime between 4 years ago and the present. The events are listed in a tentative chronological order, but there is no confirmation on when exactly they occurred relative to the present.
Last Ludi Harpastum (~1 year to 6 months ago) ― The events of the manga's main story, set in Mondstadt, occur. At the end of the story, Collei leaves Mondstadt with Cyno to go to Sumeru.
Kaveh is commissioned by Dori to design and build The Palace of Alcazarzaray. The first version of the palace is destroyed by The Withering 70% into its completion. The Forest Rangers show up and clear away The Withering Zone. Kaveh and Tighnari meet each other around this time.
Kaveh sells his home and all of his possessions to fund 70% of the construction of the second Palace of Alcazarzaray, with Dori covering the rest. Kaveh gains his Dendro Vision after transferring his assets.
After overspending on the project, there was still Mora to be repaid, and Dori convinces Kaveh to foot the bill, resulting in his bankruptcy and debt. Kaveh gains nationwide fame in Sumeru as a result of completing this project and Kaveh spends a fortnight in Lambad's Tavern due to his homelessness before reuniting with Alhaitham. Alhaitham invites Kaveh to move in with him after this encounter.
Kaveh designed and built Mehrak using a machine core excavated from King Deshret's kingdom.
Fontaine
"The Two Musketeers Incident" - An assassin hired by Morris murdered Elisa to cover up his illegitimate relationship with her. This murder was witnessed by their children - Baptiste and Veronique - leading them to seek revenge against Morris. Twenty years later, Baptiste would pen "The Two Musketeers," a novel-turned-biography, while Veronique had trained to become a musketeer herself.
? years ago ― Wriothesley is adopted by a seemingly great couple who have also adopted other children.
Later, Wriothesley would learn that the couple had only raised him, as well as their other adopted children, for the purposes of human trafficking; the children who were sold were never seen again, and those who didn't sell were simply "disposed of."
Upon learning the truth behind his "adoptive parents," he killed them and set all of the remaining children free. He was then convicted for his crimes, and sent to the Fortress of Meropide. Eventually, he routs the previous administrator after declaring a duel against them, and ends up taking the post for himself.
~3 years ago ― Callas, the president of Spina di Rosula, is accused of murdering Jacques, a Sinthe seller turned double agent who Callas had been working with behind the scenes to put an end to the Sinthe trade. In actuality, an unknown assassin hired by Marcel had shot and killed Jacques, and was in turn killed by Callas. Marcel then dissolved the assassin's body with water from the Primordial Sea, erasing any evidence that would have exonerated Callas.
Rather than risk Navia's safety by testifying agains the Sinthe producers in court and provoking them, Callas chose to maintain his innocence through a duel rather than go through a trial. Before dying at the hands of Clorinde, he told her to take care of Navia, a final request which she accepted.
? months ago ― The Kamera is redeveloped in Fontaine and spreads to other nations.
Golden Apple Archipelago
? years or months ago ― Dongdong's father ends up on the Haar Islands. He is later saved.
? years or months ago ― Alice visits the Haar Islands. She decides to plan for Klee, her friends, and Diluc to enjoy a nice summer vacation.
After the Traveler meets Paimon ― The events of Midsummer Island Adventure occur, with or without the Traveler involved.
After spending some time in Teyvat ― The events of Summertime Odyssey occur, with or without the Traveler involved.
Other Nations
After running away from home in a fit of boredom, a 14-year-old Ajax (later known as Tartaglia or Childe) falls into the Abyss, where he meets a swordswoman called Skirk. She teaches him how to navigate through the Abyss, trains him to fight, and hones his ability to cause chaos around him. After spending three months there, he returns to Teyvat, where only three days had passed since his disappearance.
The newfound havoc Ajax left in his wake led his father to hand him over to the Fatui, where his uncanny prowess in battle caught the attention of Pulcinella, the 5th Harbinger. Ajax was officially inducted into the Fatui and worked his way up, until he became the youngest-ever Harbinger to join their ranks.
The Traveler wakes up after being attacked by the Unknown God, finding the current state of Teyvat unfamiliar. They continue wandering alone for some time until they meet Paimon.
2 months ago — The Traveler meets Paimon after saving her from drowning by fishing her out. After teaching the Traveler the common Teyvat language, she suggests that they look for the Seven Archons to see if they have clues about their sibling's whereabouts.


The English localization of Moonlit Bamboo Forest (III) states that disaster would befall the world if the three sisters failed to switch places in time. This is a major misinterpretation of the original Chinese text, which says that they continued switching places up until the great disaster descended. (See Moonlit Bamboo Forest § Notes for details.)

In the original Chinese text for A Drunkard's Tale (III), the sentence "This wasteland is said to be a land beyond the dominion of the deities, inhabited only by [...] fallen gods, where the former palaces of the Seelie now stand empty" refers to The Seven when it uses "deities" (Chinese: 神 "gods,") juxtaposed against the term "fallen gods" (Chinese: 魔神 "demon god,") a term which, at the time the book was released in-game, only referred to gods who lived before the end of the Archon War. It can thus be assumed that the Seelie civilization — and, by extension, primordial human civilization — spanned the entire world and not just the surface-level continent of Teyvat that The Seven now rule over.

Editors' Assumptions
This reference is defined in a template or other generated block, and for now can only be previewed in source mode.

In both Character Teaser - "Raiden Shogun: Nightmare" and Story Teaser: Promise of a People's Dream, which depict other events in chronological order, the Kitsune Saiguu's death during the Abyss' attack is depicted before Makoto's death in what appears to be Khaenri'ah. From this, it can be assumed that the Abyss attacked Teyvat before The Seven were involved in Khaenri'ah. However, this does not exclude the possibility that the gods in Celestia attacked Khaenri'ah first.
